Alice Bailey & Djwhal Khul
Telepathy and the Etheric Vehicle
Table of Contents

Teaching on Telepathy

I. The Field of Telepathic Interplay
II. Telepathic Work
III. Three Types of Telepathy
Instinctual Telepathy
Mental Telepathy
Intuitional Telepathy
IV. Three Types of Energy Involved
V. The Growth of Telepathic Rapport
VI. Group Telepathic Work
VII. The Science of Impression
VIII. The Supreme Science of Contact
IX. Expanding Areas of Conscious Interaction
X. Sequential Revelation of Relationships
XI. Results of Contact and Receptivity
XII. Relation of the Human to the Hierarchical Center
XIII. Telepathic Sensitivity - A Normal Unfoldment
XIV. Higher Aspects of Relationship
XV. Inter-Planetary and Extra-Planetary Relationships

Teaching on the Etheric Vehicle

I. The Nature of the Etheric Body
II. The Basis of Non-Separateness
III. Planetary and Human Centers
IV. The Centers and the Personality
The Point at the Center
The Related Energies
The Sphere of Radiation
The Central Triangle of Energies
V. The Nature of Space
VI. The Planetary Life - A Center in the Solar System

TEACHING ON TELEPATHY

I. The Field of Telepathic Interplay
One of the characteristics, distinguishing the group of world servers and knowers, is
that the outer organization which holds them integrated is practically non-existent.
They are held together by an inner structure of thought and by a telepathic medium
of interrelation. The Great Ones, Whom we all seek to serve, are thus linked, and can
- at the slightest need and with the least expenditure of force - get en rapport with
each other. They are all tuned to a particular vibration.
In the new groups are collected together people who are very diverse in their nature,
who are found upon differing rays, who are of different nationalities, and who are
each of them the product of widely varying environments and heredity. Besides
these obvious factors which immediately attract attention, there is also to be found
an equal diversity in the life experience of the souls concerned. The complexity of the
problem is also tremendously increased when one remembers the long road which
each has travelled and the many factors (emerging out of a dim and distant past)
which have contributed to make each person what he now is. When, therefore, one
dwells on the barriers and difficulties supervening upon such diverse conditions, the
question arises at once: What provides the common meeting ground, and what
makes it possible to have an interplay between the minds involved? The answer to
this question is of paramount importance and necessitates a dear understanding. [2]
When the Biblical words are used: "In Him we live and move and have our being,"
we have the statement of a fundamental law in nature and the enunciated basis of
the fact which we cover by the rather meaningless word: Omnipresence.
Omnipresence has its basis in the substance of the universe, and in what the
scientists call the ether; this word "ether" is a generic term covering the ocean of
energies which are all interrelated and which constitute that one synthetic energy
body of our planet.
In approaching, therefore, the subject of telepathy, it must be carefully borne in mind that
the etheric body of every form in nature is an integral part of the substantial form of God
Himself - not the dense physical form, but what the esotericists regard as the form-
making substance. We use the word God to signify the expression of the One Life which
animates every form on the outer objective plane. The etheric or energy body, therefore,
of every human being is an integral part of the etheric body of the planet itself and
consequently of the solar system. Through this medium, every human being is basically
related to every other expression of the Divine Life, minute or great. The function of the
etheric body is to receive energy impulses and to be swept into activity by these impulses,
or streams of force, emanating from some originating source or other. The etheric body is
in reality naught but energy. It is composed of myriads of threads of force or tiny streams
of energy, held in relation to the emotional and mental bodies and to the soul by their
coordination effect. These streams of energy, in their turn, have an effect on the physical
body and swing it into activity of some kind or another, according to the nature and
power of whatever type of energy may be dominating the etheric body at any particular
time. [3]
Through the etheric body, therefore, circulates energy emanating from some mind.
With humanity in the mass, response is made unconsciously to the rulings of the

Universal Mind; this is complicated in our time and age by a growing responsiveness
to the mass ideas - called sometimes public opinion - of the rapidly evolving human
mentality. Within the human family are also found those who respond to that inner
group of Thinkers Who, working in mental matter, control from the subjective side of
life the emergence of the great plan and the manifestation of divine purpose.
This group of Thinkers falls into seven main divisions and is presided over by three
great Lives or superconscious Entities. These three are the Manu, the Christ, and the
Mahachohan. These three work primarily through the method of influencing the
minds of the adepts and the initiates. These latter in their turn influence the disciples
of the world, and these disciples, each in his own place and on his own responsibility,
work out their concept of the plan and seek to give expression to it as far as
possible. It is, therefore, as you can surmise, a process of stepping down rates of
vibration until they are sufficiently heavy to affect physical plane matter and thus
make possible the building of organized effects on the physical plane. These disciples
have hitherto worked very much alone except when karmic relationships have
revealed them to each other, and telepathic inter-communication has been
fundamentally confined to the Hierarchy of adepts and initiates, both in and out of
incarnation, and to Their individual work with Their disciples.
It is, however, now deemed possible to establish a resembling condition and a
telepathic relation between disciples on the physical plane. No matter where they
may find themselves, this group of mystics and knowers will [4] eventually find it
feasible to communicate with one another and frequently do even now. A basic
mystical idea or some new revelation of truth is suddenly recognized by many and
finds expression simultaneously through the medium of many minds. No one person
can claim individual right to the enunciated principle or truth. Several minds have
registered it. It is usually stated, however, in a wide generalization, that these
people have tapped the inner thought currents or have responded to the play of the
Universal Mind. Literally and technically this is not so. The Universal Mind is tapped
by some member of the planetary Hierarchy according to His mental bias and
equipment, and the immediate needs sensed by the working adepts. He then
presents the new idea, new discovery, or the new revelation to the group of adepts
(telepathically, of course, my brother) and, when it has been discussed by them, He
later presents it to His group of disciples. Among them He will find one who responds
more readily and intelligently than the others and this one, through his clear thinking
and the power of his formulated thought-forms, can then influence other minds.
These others grasp the concept as theirs; they seize upon it and work it out into
manifestation. Each regards it as his special privilege so to do and, because of this
specializing faculty and his automatically engendered responsibility, he throws back
of it all the energy which is his, and works and fights for his thought-forms.
An illustration of this is to be found in the history of the League of Nations. Before He
took up special work, the Master Serapis sought to bring through some constructive idea
for the helping of humanity. He conceived of a world unity in the realm of politics which
would work out as an intelligent banding of the nations for the preservation of
international peace. He presented it to the adepts in conclave and it was felt that
something could be done. [5]
The Master Jesus undertook to present it to His group of disciples as He was working
in the occident. One of these disciples on the inner planes, seized upon the
suggestion and passed it on (or rather stepped it down) until it registered in the
brain of Colonel House. He, not recording the source (of which he was totally
unaware), passed it on in turn to that sixth ray aspirant, called Woodrow Wilson.

Then, fed by the wealth of analogous ideas in the minds of many, it was presented to
the world. It should be borne in mind that the function of a disciple is to focus a
stream of energy of some special kind upon the physical plane where it can become
an attractive center of force and draw to itself similar types of ideas and thought
currents which are not strong enough to live by themselves or to make a sufficiently
strong impact upon the human consciousness.
In union is strength. This is the second law governing telepathic communication,
The first law is:
The power to communicate is to be found in the very nature of
substance itself. It lies potentially within the ether, and the
significance of telepathy is to be found in the word omnipresence.
The second law is:
The interplay of many minds produces a unity of thought which is
powerful enough to be recognized by the brain.
Here we have a law governing a subjective activity and another law governing
objective manifestation. Let us voice these laws in the simplest manner possible.
When [6] each member of the group can function in his mind-consciousness,
untrammelled by the brain or the emotional nature, he will discover the universality
of the mental principle which is the first exoteric expression of the soul
consciousness. He will then enter into the world of ideas, becoming aware of them
through the sensitive receiving plate of the mind. He then seeks to find those who
respond to the same type of ideas and who react to the same mental impulse,
simultaneously with himself. Uniting himself to them he discovers himself to be en
rapport with them.
The understanding of the first law produces results in the mind or mental body. The
understanding of the second law produces results in a lesser receiving station, the
brain. This is possible through the strengthening of a man's own mental reaction by
the mental reaction of others, similarly receptive. It will be found therefore that this
process of communication, governed by these two laws, has always been in
operation among the adepts, the initiates and the senior disciples who are in physical
plane bodies. Now the operation of this process is to be extended and steadily
developed by the emerging group of mystics and world servers who constitute, in
embryo, the world Savior.
Only those who know something of the meaning of concentration and meditation and
who can hold the mind steady in the light will be able to understand the first law and
comprehend that interplay of thought-directed energies which finds one terminal of
expression in the mind of some inspired Thinker, and the other terminal in the mind of
the attentive world server who seeks to tune in on those mind processes which hold the
clue to ultimate world salvation. The thought-directing energy has for its source a
Thinker Who can enter into the divine Mind, owing to His having transcended human
limitation; the thought-directed receiver [7] is the man, in exoteric expression, who has
aligned his brain, his mind, and his soul.

It is a fact that omnipresence, which is a law in nature and based on the fact that the
etheric bodies of all forms constitute the world etheric body, makes omniscience
possible. The etheric body of the planetary Logos is swept into activity by His
directed will; energy is the result of His thought-form, playing in and through His
energy body. This thought-form embodies and expresses His world Purpose. All the

subhuman forms of life and the human forms up to the stage of advanced man are
governed by divine thought through the medium of their energy bodies which are an
integral part of the whole. They react, however, unconsciously and unintelligently.
Advanced humanity, the mystics and the knowers, are becoming increasingly aware
of the mind which directs the evolutionary process. When this awareness is
cultivated and the individual mind is brought consciously into contact with the mind
of God as it expresses itself through the illumined mind of the Hierarchy of adepts,
we shall have the steady growth of omniscience. This is the whole story of telepathic
interplay in the true sense; it portrays the growth of that oligarchy of elect souls who
will eventually rule the world, who will be chosen so to rule, and who will be
recognized by the mass as eligible for that high office through the coordination that
they have established between:
1. The universal mind.
2. Their individual mind illumined by the soul consciousness.
3. The brain, reacting to the individual mind, and
4. The group of those whose minds and brains are similarly tuned and
telepathically related. [8]
In connection with disciples and aspirants to discipleship, it is presumed that their
minds are somewhat attuned to the soul; that they are also so aligned that the soul,
mind and brain are coordinated and are beginning to function as a unit. This is the
individual responsibility. Now comes the task of learning to be responsive to the
group and to find and contact those minds which are energized by similar thought
currents. This has to be cultivated. How, my brother, shall this be done? Let us
consider the various types of telepathic work.
The undeveloped human being and the unthinking, non mental man or woman can
be and often are telepathic, but the center through which they work is the solar
plexus. The line of communication is, therefore, from solar plexus to solar plexus.
This is therefore instinctual telepathy and concerns feeling in every case. It involves,
invariably, radiations from the solar plexus, which in the case of the animal world
serves usually as the instinctual brain. This type of telepathic communication is
definitely a characteristic of the animal body of man, and one of the best illustrations
of this telepathic rapport is that existing between a mother and her child. It is this
type of telepathy which is predominantly present in the average spiritualistic seance.
There the medium, quite unconsciously, sets up a telepathic rapport with the people
in the circle. Their feelings, worries, sorrows, and desires become apparent and form
part of the reading, so called. Both the sitters and the medium are functioning
through the same center. With this class of medium, and in this type of seance, the
highly intelligent and mentally polarized man or woman will learn nothing, and will
probably receive no messages, unless faked. Hence, therefore, when it comes to
scientific investigation by trained minds, physical phenomena has predominated and
not the more subtle forms of psychism. Where [9] the more subtle forms of super-
or extra-sensory perception have been involved, the subjects have been either
adolescent or in their early twenties and have been primarily and rightly focused in
the emotional-feeling body. This is true even when they are highly intellectual.
This form of telepathic communication is therefore of two kinds, with the solar plexus
always involved:
1. It will be from solar plexus to solar plexus between two people who are
ordinary, emotional, governed by desire, and primarily centered in the astral
and animal bodies.

2. It will be between such a "solar plexus" person, if I may so call him, and a
higher type whose solar plexus center is functioning actively but whose throat
center is also alive. This type of person registers in two places - provided that
the thought sensed and sent out by the solar plexus person has in it
something of mental substance or energy. Pure feeling and entirely emotional
emanations between people necessitate only solar plexus contact.
Later, when group work in telepathy is undertaken, the centers of transmission
wherein high and consecrated feeling, devotion, aspiration and love are concerned
and where the groups work with pure love, communication will be from heart to
heart, and from a group heart to another group heart. The phrase "heart to heart
talk," so often used, is usually a misnomer at this time, but will some day be true. At
present it is usually a solar plexus conversation!
The second form of telepathic work is that of mind to mind, and it is with this form of
communication that the highest investigation is at this time concerned. Only mental
types are involved, and the more that emotion and feeling [10] and strong desire
can be eliminated, the more accurate will be the work accomplished. The strong
desire to achieve success in telepathic work, and the fear of failure, are the surest
ways to offset fruitful effort. In all such work as this, an attitude of non-attachment -
and a spirit of "don't care" are of real assistance. Experimenters along this line need
to give more time and thought to the recognition of types of force. They need to
realize that emotion, and desire for anything, on the part of the receiving agent
create streams of emanating energy which rebuff or repulse that which seeks to
make contact, such as the directed thought of someone seeking rapport. When these
streams are adequately strong, they act like a boomerang and return to the
emanating center, being attracted back there by the power of the vibration which
sent them forth. In this thought lies hid the cause of:
a. The failure on the part of the broadcasting or transmitting agent. Intense
desire to make a satisfactory impression will attract the outgoing thought
back again to the transmitter.
b. The failure on the part of the receiving agent whose own intense desire to be
successful sends out such a stream of outgoing energy that the stream of
incoming energy is met, blocked and driven back whence it came; or, if the
receiver is aware of this and seeks to stem the tide of his desire, he
frequently succeeds in surrounding himself with a wall of inhibited desire
through which naught can penetrate.

II. Telepathic Work
Telepathy and the allied powers will only be understood when the nature of force, of
emanations and radiations, and of energy currents, is better grasped. This is rapidly
coming about as science penetrates more deeply into the arcana of energies and
begins to work - as does the occultist - in the world of forces.
It should also be borne in mind that it is only as the centers employed are
consciously used that we have that carefully directed work which will be fruitful of
results. For instance, an emotional person, using primarily the solar plexus center,
will be endeavoring to enter into rapport with a mental type. From this will result
only confusion. The two parties concerned are using different centers and are
sensitive to certain types of force and closed to others. Again, some people, even if
mentally polarized and therefore sensitive to similar vibrations attempt to make a
telepathic contact when one party is under emotional strain and therefore not
responsive, or one party is intensively occupied with some mental problem and is
encased in a wall of thought-forms and therefore impervious to impressions. You can
see, therefore, how a cultivation of detachment is a necessary qualification for
success in telepathic work.
All who seek to tread the Path of Discipleship are endeavoring to live in the head
center, and - through meditation - to bring in the power of the soul. The problem
which you face, as disciples learning telepathic sensitivity, is founded on two things:
a. Upon which of your three bodies is the most active; thereby is indicated
where you live subjectively most of the time. [12]
b. Upon which center is the most expressive in your equipment, and through
which you contact most easily modern living conditions. I mean by these
words: where, literally speaking, your life energy is predominantly focused
and your sentient energy expresses itself the most.
An understanding of this will make you better able to work and to make intelligent
experiment. Therefore, watch yourselves with care yet impersonally, and work out
the why and the wherefore of the effects produced, for by this means you will learn.
The third type of telepathic work is that from soul to soul. This is the highest type of
telepathic work possible to humanity and is that form of communication which has
been responsible for all the inspirational writings of real power, the world Scriptures,
the illumined utterances, the inspired speakers, and the language of symbolism. It
only becomes possible where there is an integrated personality, and, at the same
time, the power to focus oneself in the soul consciousness. The mind and the brain
have, at the same time, to be brought into perfect rapport and alignment.
It is my intention to elucidate further this science of communication, which started
through the sense of touch and developed through sound, symbols, words and
sentences, languages, writing, art, and on again to the stage of higher symbols,
vibratory contact, telepathy, inspiration and illumination. I have, however, in the
above, dealt with the general outline and we will take the specific details later.
The work of the telepathic communicators is one of the most important in the coming
new age, and it will be of value to gain some idea of its significance and techniques.
[13] I would, in summarizing the above instruction, state that in connection with
individuals:
1. Telepathic communication is
a. Between soul and mind.

b. Between soul, mind and brain.
This is as far as interior individual development is concerned.
2. When it is found between individuals, telepathic communication is
a. Between soul and soul.
b. Between mind and mind.
c. Between solar plexus and solar plexus, and therefore purely emotional.
d. Between all these three aspects of energy simultaneously, in the case
of very advanced people.
3. Telepathic communication is also:
a. Between a Master and His disciples or disciple.
b. Between a Master and His group and a group or groups of sensitives
and aspirants on the physical plane.
c. Between subjective and objective groups.
d. Between the occult Hierarchy and groups of disciples on the physical
plane.
e. Between the Hierarchy and the New Group of World Servers in order to
reach humanity and lift it nearer the goal.
This concerns the new science of group telepathic communication, of which herd or
mass telepathy (so well known) is the lowest known expression. This instinctual
telepathy which is shown by a flight of birds, acting as a unit, or that animal
telepathy which serves to govern so mysteriously the movements of herds of
animals, and the rapid transmission [14] of information among the savage races and
non-intelligent peoples - these are all instances of that lower externalization of an
inner spiritual reality. An intermediate stage of this instinctual activity, based largely
on solar plexus reactions, can be seen in modern mass psychology and public
opinion. It is, as you know, predominantly emotional, unintelligent, astral and fluidic
in its expression. This is changing rapidly and shifting into the realm of what is called
"intelligent public opinion," but this is, as yet, slow. It involves the activity of the
throat and ajna centers. We have, therefore:
1. Instinctual telepathy.
2. Mental telepathy.
3. Intuitional telepathy.
I would remind you right at the outset that sensitivity to the thoughts of one's
Master, sensitivity to the world of ideas, and sensitivity to intuitional impressions are
all forms of telepathic sensitivity.
In any consideration of this theme, it is obvious that there are three major factors
which must be considered:
1. The initiating agent. I use this word with deliberate intent, as the power to
work telepathically, both as initiating agent and as recipient, is closely
connected with initiation, and is one of the indications that a man is ready for
that process.
2. The recipient of that which is conveyed to him on the "wings of thought."
3. The medium through which it is intended to convey the transfer of thought, of
idea, of wish, of imprint, and therefore of some form of knowledge. [15]

This is the simplest statement of the elementary mechanics of the process. This
indicates, likewise, the most elementary comprehension of the thought covered so
frequently by the Bhagavad Gita in the words which we have translated in the West
by the terms: the Knower, the Field of Knowledge, and the Known. You have oft
been told that every sacred book, such as the Bhagavad Gita, for instance, has
various interpretations, dependent upon the point in evolution of the reader, or
seeker after truth. This interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita in terms of
Communicator, Communication and Communicant still demands elucidation, and in
the idea which I have above conveyed to you, I have given you a hint. [16]

III. Three Types of Telepathy
Let us now discuss in some detail the three types of telepathy enumerated above:
instinctual telepathy, mental telepathy, and intuitional telepathy. These three
produce differing modes of activity and tap (to use a familiar word) differing areas of
communication.
1. Instinctual Telepathy is based upon those impacts of energy which come from
one etheric body and make an impression upon another. The medium of
communication employed is, as we have seen, the etheric substance of all bodies,
which is necessarily one with the etheric substance of the planet. The area around
the solar plexus (though not in direct relation to that center as it exists as an
instrument differentiated from all other instruments or centers) is sensitive to the
impact of etheric energy, for this area in the etheric body is in direct "touch" with the
astral body, the feeling body. Also, close to the solar plexus is found that center near
the spleen which is the direct instrument for the entrance of prana into the human
mechanism. This instinctual response to etheric contact was the mode of
communication in Lemurian times, and largely took the place of thought and of
speech. It concerned itself primarily with two types of impression: that which had to
do with the instinct of self-preservation, and that which had to do with self-
reproduction. A higher form of this instinctual telepathy has been preserved for us in
the expression we so frequently use, "I have a feeling that...," and allied phrases.
These are more definitely astral in their implications and work through the astral
substance, using the solar plexus area as a sensitive plate for impact and
impression. [17]
One point should here be made clear, and upon it you should ponder. This astral (not
etheric) sensitivity, or "feeling telepathy" is basically the Atlantean mode of
communication, and involved finally the use of the solar plexus center itself as the
receiving agent; the emitting agent (if I may use such a phrase) worked, however,
through the entire area of the diaphragm. It was as though there appeared, through
emergence, a gathering of forces or outgoing waves of energy in that part of the
human vehicle. The relatively wide area from which the information was sent out
acted as a large general distributor; the area which received the impression,
however, was more localized, involving only the solar plexus. The reason for this can
be found in the fact that in Atlantean days the human being was still unable to think,
as we understand thinking. The whole lower part of the body, in a sense difficult for
us to grasp, was given up to feeling; the communicator's one thought-contribution
was the name of the recipient, plus the name or noun form of that which was the
idea to be conveyed. This embryo thought winged its way to its goal, and the
powerful "feeling" apparatus of the solar plexus received it (acting like a magnet)
and drew the "feeling impression" powerfully there, drawing thus upon the
communicator. It is this process which is pursued when, for instance, some mother
"feels" that some danger threatens her child, or that some happening is taking place
in connection with her child. She is thus sometimes enabled to send, by the medium
of instinctual love, a most definite warning. The solar plexus is involved where the
recipient is concerned; the area around the diaphragm is involved where the
communicator is concerned.
2. In our race, the Aryan, instinctual telepathic work is still the major expression of
this spiritual possibility, but at the same time Mental Telepathy is becoming
increasingly [18] prevalent. This will be more and more so, as time goes on. It is
most difficult in this transition period to define, or differentiate, the peculiar areas
involved, because the solar plexus is still exceedingly active. What we have today is
a mixture of instinctual telepathy and the beginning of mental telepathy. This

manifests, however, very seldom, and then only in the educated classes. With the
masses, instinctual telepathy is still the mode of contact. The throat center is
primarily involved where mental telepathy is concerned; there is also sometimes a
little heart activity and always a measure of solar plexus reaction. Hence our
problem. Frequently the communicator will send a message via the throat center,
and the recipient will still use the solar plexus. This is the most frequent method, and
I would ask you to remember this. The sending out of a message may involve, and
frequently does in connection with disciples, the throat center, but the recipient will
probably use the solar plexus center. The throat center is the center, par excellence,
or the medium, of all creative work. The heart and the throat, however, must
eventually be used in synthesis. I stated the reason for this earlier in the words:
"Only from the heart center can stream, in reality, those lines of energy which link
and bind together. It was for this reason that I have assigned certain meditations
which stimulated the heart center into action, linking the heart center (between the
shoulder blades) to the head center, through the medium of the higher
correspondence to the heart center, found within the head center (the thousand
petalled lotus). This heart center, when adequately radiatory and magnetic, relates
disciples to each other and to all the world. It will also produce that telepathic
interplay which is so much to be desired and which is so constructively useful to the
spiritual Hierarchy - provided it is established within a group of pledged [19]
disciples, dedicated to the service of humanity. They can then be trusted."
(Discipleship in the New Age I, Page 87)

3. Intuitional Telepathy is one of the developments upon the Path of Discipleship.
It is one of the fruits of true meditation. The area involved is the head and throat,
and the three centers which will be rendered active in the process are the head
center, which is receptive to impression from higher sources, and the ajna center
which is the recipient of the idealistic intuitional impressions; this ajna center can
then "broadcast" that which is received and recognized, using the throat center as
the creative formulator of thought, and the factor which embodies the sensed or
intuited idea.
It will be apparent to you, therefore, how necessary it is to have a better recognition
of the activity of the centers, as they are detailed in the Hindu philosophy; and until
there is some real understanding of the part the vital body plays as the broadcaster
and as the recipient of feelings, thoughts and ideas, there will be little progress made
in the right understanding of modes of communication.
There is an interesting parallel between the three modes of telepathic work and their
three techniques of accomplishment, and the three major ways of communicating on
Earth:
• Instinctual telepathy - train travel, stations everywhere - telegraph
• Mental telepathy - ocean travel, ports on the periphery of all lands -
telephone
• Intuitional telepathy - air travel, landing place - radio
That which is going on in connection with the human consciousness is ever
externalized or finds its analogy upon the physical plane, and so it is in connection
with developed sensitivity to impression.
There is still another way in which we can look at the entire subject of response
between broadcasting areas of [20] consciousness and the receiving areas of
consciousness. We might list the divisions of this process. Much must remain

theoretical, and little can, as yet, be worked out in practice. However, let me list the
various forms of telepathic work for your general instruction:
1. Telepathic work from solar plexus to solar plexus. With this we have already
dealt. This is closely connected with feeling, and little or no thought is
involved; it concerns emotions (fear, hate, disgust, love, desire and many
other purely astral reactions). It is carried on instinctively and below the
diaphragm.
2. Telepathic work from mind to mind. This is beginning to be possible, and
many more people are capable of this kind of communication than is now
realized. People today do not know whence various mental impressions come,
and this greatly enhances the complexity of life at this time and increases the
mental problem of thousands.
3. Telepathic work from heart to heart. This type of impression is the
sublimation of the "feeling" response registered earlier upon the ladder of
evolution in the solar plexus. It concerns only group impressions, and is the
basis of the condition spoken of in the Bible in connection with the greatest
Sensitive humanity has ever produced, the Christ. There He is referred to as
"A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief," but in this condition no
personal sorrow or grief is involved. It is simply the consciousness of the
sorrow of the world and the weight of grief under which humanity struggles.
"The fellowship of Christ's suffering" is the reaction of the disciple to the same
world condition. This is the true "broken heart," and is as yet a very rare
thing to find. The usual broken heart is literally a disrupted solar plexus
center, bringing complete demolition of what is occultly called "the center of
feeling," and consequently the wrecking of the nervous system. It is [21]
really brought about by a failure to handle conditions as a soul.
4. Telepathic work from soul to soul. This is, for humanity, the highest possible
type of work. When a man can begin, as a soul, to respond to other souls and
their impacts and impressions, then he is rapidly becoming ready for the
processes which lead to initiation.
There are two other groups of telepathic possibilities which I would like to list
for you. They are possibilities only when the four above mentioned groups of
telepathic impression are beginning to form a conscious part of the disciple's
experience.

5. Telepathic work between soul and mind. This is the technique whereby the
mind is "held steady in the light," and then becomes aware of the content of
the soul's consciousness, an innate content, or that which is part of the group
life of the soul on its own level, and when in telepathic communication with
other souls, as mentioned under our fourth heading. This is the true meaning
of intuitional telepathy. Through this means of communication the mind of the
disciple is fertilized with the new and spiritual ideas; he becomes aware of the
great Plan; his intuition is awakened. One point should here be borne in mind,
which is oft forgotten: The inflow of the new ideas from the buddhic levels,
thus awakening the intuitional aspect of the disciple, indicates that his soul is
beginning to integrate consciously and definitely with the Spiritual Triad, and
therefore to identify itself less and less with the lower reflection, the
personality. This mental sensitivity and rapport between soul and mind
remain for a long time relatively inchoate on the mental plane. That which is

sensed remains too vague or too abstract for formulation. It is the stage of
the mystical vision and of mystical unfoldment.
6. Telepathic work between soul, mind and brain. In [22] this stage the mind
still remains the recipient of impression from the soul but, in its turn, it
becomes a "transmitting agent" or communicator. The impressions received
from the soul, and the intuitions registered as coming from the Spiritual
Triad, via the soul, are now formulated into thoughts; the vague ideas and
the vision hitherto unexpressed can now be clothed in form and sent out as
embodied thought-forms to the brain of the disciple. In time, and as the
result of technical training, the disciple can in this way reach the mind and
brains of other disciples. This is an exceedingly interesting stage. It
constitutes one of the major rewards of right meditation and involves much
true responsibility. You will find more anent this stage of telepathy in my
other books, particularly A Treatise on White Magic. (Pages 176-180, 415,
427-428, 477-478.)
This much that I have outlined here is practically all that concerns man in his
own inner individual contacts and work and training. There is, however, a
whole range of telepathic contacts which should be noted because they
constitute the goal for humanity.
7. Telepathic work between a Master (the focal point of a group) and the disciple
in the world. It is an occult truth that no man is really admitted into a
Master's group, as an accepted disciple, until he has become spiritually
impressionable and can function as a mind in collaboration with his own soul.
Prior to that he cannot be a conscious part of a functioning group on the inner
planes gathered around a personalized force, the Master; he cannot work in
true rapport with his fellow disciples. But when he can work somewhat as a
conscious soul, then the Master can begin to impress him with group ideas via
his own soul. He hovers then for quite a while upon the periphery of the
group. Eventually, as his spiritual sensitivity increases, he [23] can be
definitely impressed by the Master and taught the technique of contact. Later,
the group of disciples, functioning as one synthetic thought-form, can reach
him and thus automatically he becomes one of them. To those who have the
true esoteric sense, the above paragraph will convey a good deal of
information, hitherto hidden.
8. Telepathic work between a Master and His group. This is the mode of work
whereby a Master trains and works through His disciples. He impresses them
simultaneously with an idea or an aspect of truth. By watching their reactions,
He can gauge the united activity of the group and the simultaneity of their
response.
9. Telepathic work between subjective and objective groups. I do not refer here
to the contact between an inner group of disciples, functioning consciously on
the subjective levels, and the outer form that group takes. I refer to an inner
group and a different outer group or groups. These groups, on both levels,
can be either good or bad, according to the quality or caliber of the group
personnel and their motives, This opens up a wide range of contacts and is
one of the ways in which the Hierarchy of Masters work, as individuals. It is,
however, not possible for groups upon the outer plane to respond to this type
of contact until the bulk of their members have the heart center awakened. In
this connection a most interesting point should be noted. The awakening of
the heart center indicates inclusiveness, group appreciation and contact, also
group thought and group life-activity. Unless, however, the head center is

also awakened and active, the soul is not able to control, and this heart
activity need not necessarily be what we call good or spiritual activity. It is
quite impersonal, like the sun, of which the heart is, as you know, the
symbol. It shines alike upon the good and the bad; and group activity, as a
result of heart awakening, can include the bad groups [24] as well as the
good groups. Therefore you can see the necessity of awakening the head
center and bringing in the control of the soul aspect; and hence the emphasis
laid upon character building and the need for meditation.
10. Telepathic work between the Hierarchy of Masters as a group or a part of the
Hierarchy, and groups of disciples. There is little I can tell you about this, and
you would not and could not understand. The experiment we are now making,
in connection with the New Group of World Servers, is related to this form of
telepathic work.
Some of these forms of telepathic work have necessarily their distorted reflections on
the physical plane. These you might like to ponder upon, and trace the
correspondences between them. What is "mass psychology" with its unreasoning
quality and its blind activity, but a massed reaction to solar plexus impressions as
passed from group to group? What is "public opinion," so called, but vague mental
reactions by the mass of men beginning to grope their way on the mental plane, to
the activity and play of more active and powerful minds? The written and spoken
words are not in themselves adequate to account for the display of modern opinion
as we now have it. What is the apparently accurate information, so rapidly circulated
among the savage races, but an expression of that instinctual telepathy which uses
the vital body and the pranic fluids as its medium? [25]

IV. Three Types of Energy Involved
Telepathic interrelation between the members of a group grows through the medium
of a constant attitude of reflective thought and a steadfast love for each other. I
would remind you that when I use these terms I am referring to the two major types
of energy in the world today. Essentially, energy is active substance. These two
types of force are of a vitality, potency and substance so subtle and fine that they
can work through and "force into activity" the pranic fluids which constitute the
substance of the etheric body and to which I referred in a much earlier instruction (A
Treatise on the Seven Rays, II, 113). The telepathic work, therefore, is, concerned
with three types of energy which demonstrate as forces with the power to motivate:
1. The force of love with its negative quality which
a. Attracts the needed material with which to clothe the idea, the thought or
concept to be transmitted; it is also the attractive agency utilized by the
recipient. Therefore both transmitter and recipient work with the same
agency, but the transmitter uses the love energy of the larger whole whilst
the recipient concentrates, upon the transmitter, the love energy of his own
nature. If this be so, you can see why I emphasize the necessity for love and
for non-criticism.
b. Constitutes the coherent quality which links together the transmitter and the
recipient, and which also produces the coherency of that which is transmitted.
[26]
It will be apparent to you consequently that it is only at this time that we can begin
to look for a wider and more general expression in the world today of the processes
of telepathy, for only today is the love principle really beginning to affect the world
on a large scale. Love of a cause, a party or an idea is becoming more and more
prevalent, producing in the initial stages the apparently wide cleavages with which
we are so familiar and by which we are so distressed at this time, yet producing
finally a dominance of the attitudes of love which will heal breaches, and produce
synthesis among the peoples. Love (not sentiment) is the clue to successful
telepathic work. Therefore love one another with a fresh enthusiasm and devotion;
seek to express that love in every possible way - upon the physical plane, upon the
levels of emotion, and through right thought. Let the love of the soul sweep through
all like a regenerating force.
2. The force of mind. This is the illuminating energy which "lights the way" of an idea
or form to be transmitted and received. Forget not that light is subtle substance.
Upon a beam of light can the energy of the mind materialize. This is one of the most
important statements made in connection with the science of telepathy.
The success of this is dependent upon the alignment of the bodies of the transmitter
and the recipient. The double line of contact must be that of mental energy and brain
electrical energy. The magnetic power of love to attract attention, to produce
alignment, and to call forth rapport and understanding is not all that is necessary in
the new telepathy which will distinguish the new age. There must also be mental
development and mental control.
This form of telepathy is not a function of the animal soul, as in the case of the solar
plexus contact and response [27] to messages by the emotionally polarized man or
woman. This telepathic rapport and response is a characteristic of the human soul
working from mind to mind and from brain to brain. It is literally a state of
consciousness which is sufficiently conditioned by the integrated mental person so

that he is aware of and inclusive of the mental state and thought processes of
another person.
3. The energy of prana, or the etheric force of the vital body. This energy, by an act
of the will and under the pressure of the magnetic power of love, responds to or is
receptive to the dual energies mentioned above. The idea, thought-form. or mental
impression which must be recorded in the brain consciousness of the recipient opens
a way in the pranic fluids and so controls their activity (which is as ceaseless as the
thought-form-making propensities of the chitta) that the brain becomes responsive
in two ways:
a. It is rendered passive by the impact of the three types of energy, blended and
fused into one stream of force.
b. It becomes actively responsive to the idea, impression, thought-form, symbol,
words, etc., which are being swept into the area of its conscious activity.

Let me attempt to reduce the above information to practical simplicity, thus showing
how these three types of energy can be used in practical work:
1. By the use of the energy of love in three ways:
a. By sending out love (not sentiment) to your brothers at the time of
transmission or reception. [28]
b. By capitalizing on the inherent power of love to attract the material or the
substance, and thus to "clothe" in the occult sense that which you send out.
c. By sending forth the "clothed" idea, impression, etc., on a stream of love
which your brother - alert, receptive and waiting - will attract to himself by
the means of his conscious love for you.
2. By the use of mental energy through the effort to polarize yourself upon the
mental levels of consciousness. By a definite act of the will you lift your
consciousness onto the mental plane and hold it there. This action is a reflection
upon a lower plane, and in the brain consciousness, of the mind's ability to hold itself
in the light. The success of all telepathic work you do, as a group or as individuals,
will be dependent upon your capacity to "hold yourselves steady in the light"
mentally. The difference is that this time you do it for the purpose of the planned
work, and attempt to hold the mind steady in the light of the group, or in each
other's light, and not so specifically in the light of your own soul.
3. By the conscious organized use of the energy of the etheric ajna center, and
sometimes of the head center, when receiving, and of the throat center, when
transmitting. This swings etheric force into activity when engaged in telepathic work,
but entails its conscious subordination to the power of the other two energies.
Practically, you will observe that this involves on the part of the disciple the power to
do three things at once. You need to ponder more deeply upon the fact and necessity
of active outgoing energy [29] when you are occupied with the task of transmission,
and with active receptivity when you are functioning as a receiver.
I would like to point out that successful telepathic work is dependent upon the
following factors:

• First, that there are no barriers existing between the receiver and the
broadcaster. Such barriers would be lack of love or of sympathy, criticism and
suspicion.
• Secondly, that the broadcaster is mainly occupied with the clarity of his
symbol, with the word or thought, and not with the receiver. A quick glance
toward the receiver, a momentary sending forth of love and understanding is
sufficient to set up the rapport, and then attention must be paid to the clarity
of the symbol.
• Thirdly, let the receivers think with love and affection of the broadcaster for a
minute or two. Then let them forget the personality. A thread of energy,
linking receiver and broadcaster, has been established and exists. Then forget
it.
• Fourthly, let the receivers work with detachment. Most receivers are so
anxious to receive correctly that through their very intensity they counteract
their own efforts. A casual and "don't care" spirit and a close attentiveness to
the inner "picturing faculty" will net better results than any violent and strong
desire and effort to see the symbol and to contact the mind of the sender.
The brain should register a reflection of the mind content. If a ray of light is met by
an outgoing force from the receiver's mind or a powerfully emitted thought-form, it
can be prevented from reaching the mind. However, a transmitter with more expert
training can overcome this barrier. Much of the trouble will be found to be based on
the emitted thought-forms, or in the rush of ill-regulated [30] mental energy or brain
radiation which negates efforts. Therefore a quiet spirit and well regulated thoughts
will aid much, and the cultivation of that dispassion which desires nothing for the
separated self, and nothing violently.
The need of sensitive receivers is great. Train yourselves. Forget yourselves and your
own petty little affairs - so petty and unimportant when viewed in relation to the
momentous issues of the present time. Keep an attentive ear to the voices which
issue forth from the world of spiritual Being, and love each other with loyalty and
steadfastness. [31]

V. The Growth of Telepathic Rapport
I would like to point out that the use of words telepathically must be mastered as a
preliminary step to the use of sentences and of thoughts. Choose a word and
meditate upon it, knowing wherefore you have chosen it. Study it in the four ways
indicated by Patanjali; (The Light of the Soul, page 33) that is:
1. Study its form, study it symbolically, as a word picture.
2. Study it from the angle of quality, of beauty, of desire.
3. Study its underlying purpose and teaching value, and its mental appeal.
4. Study its very being and identify yourself with its divine underlying idea.
When you have reached this final stage, hold your consciousness steady at that high
point as you (if you are a transmitter) send out the word to the receiver or to the
receiving group. Receivers should in their turn achieve, as far as they can, complete
alignment so as to be responsive to all these four aspects of the word. This method
will serve to shift the receiver nearer to the plane where he should function - the
level of the higher mind. The word goes out upon the life breath of the transmitter;
his lower mind then sends out the purpose aspect; his astral consciousness is
responsible for sending out the quality aspect; and the form aspect is sent out as he
says the word - very softly and in a whisper.
The above is a good exercise and very simple; telepathic power should greatly
increase if one faithfully follows these four stages - up and within, down and without
- in the [32] work of transmitting. During the first or form stage one may use what
symbolic forms one likes to embody the word, for such a word as "will" has no
appropriate form like "pool" has; one may, if he choose, preserve the word form,
seeing it letter for letter or as a whole. But one must be sure to end with the picture
form or the word form with which he began; and that he sends out, at the close,
what he formulated at the beginning.
To summarize: A group of disciples working in an Ashram has to learn that -
1. Groups are held together by an inner structure of thought.
2. The focus of the externalized group life is the etheric body.
The etheric body is:
a. A receiving agency.
b. A circulating medium for energy coming from the mind, from the soul,
from the Master, or from the group mind.
3. The mind is the first exoteric expression of the soul consciousness, as far as
the true aspirant is concerned.
4. The following telepathic relationships are possible and must be borne in mind:
a. Solar plexus to solar plexus.
b. Mind to mind.
c. Master to disciple.
d. Groups of disciples to other similar groups.
e. Subjective groups to objective receptive groups.

f. The Hierarchy, through its great Leaders, to the various Ashrams of
the Masters. [33]
g. The Hierarchy to the New Group of World Servers.
5. The major factors which must be considered in all telepathic work are:
a. The initiating agent or emanating source.
b. The recipient of the ideas, thoughts or energy.
c. The medium of revelation.
The growth of telepathic rapport will bring in an era of universality and synthesis,
with its qualities of recognized relationships and responsiveness. This will be,
outstandingly, the glory of the Aquarian Age.
As the race achieves increasingly a mental polarization through the developing
attractive power of the mental principle, the use of language for the conveying of
thoughts between equals or of communicating with superiors will fall into disuse. It
will continue to be used in reaching the masses and those not functioning upon the
mental plane. Already voiceless prayer and aspiration and worship are deemed of
higher value than the pleadings and proclamations of voiced expression. It is for this
stage in the unfoldment of the race for which preparation must be made, and the
laws, techniques and process of telepathic communication must be made plain so
that they can be intelligently and theoretically understood.
Disciples must occupy themselves increasingly with right understanding, right
designation and right definition of the new science of telepathy. Mental
comprehension and mental sympathy will make true interplay possible, and this will
bridge between the old way of understanding thought through the medium of the
spoken or written word (embodying that thought as the individual thinker seeks to
convey it) and the future stage of immediate response to [34] thought, unlimited by
speech or other medium of expression. Disciples will endeavor to work in both ways,
and the medium of normal human relations and that of supernormal subjective
relations must be studied by them and expressed by them. In this way the time of
bridging and the period of transition can be spanned. It will take about five hundred
years for the race to become normally telepathic, and when I say normally I mean
consciously. This bridging work must be carried forward by disciples in three ways:
1. By an endeavor to understand:
a. The medium of transmission.
b. The method of transmission.
c. The manner of reception.
d. The mode of interrelated activity.
2. By the cultivation of sensitive reactions to each other and to the other human
units with whom the lot of the disciples may be cast. This involves:
a. Sensitive physical reaction, via the centers, to the forces emanating
from the centers of those with whom the disciples are associated.
Particularly should the sensitivity of the ajna center be developed.
b. Sensitivity to the state of feeling or to the emotional reactions of those
around. This is done through the development of compassion and of
sympathy, plus that detachment which will enable one to take right
action.

c. Sensitivity to the thoughts of others through mental rapport with them
upon the plane of mind. [35]
3. By all these done also in group formation as well as individually. All the
activities mentioned above must constitute group activity.
In these three ways the vehicle of the personality can be so conditioned that it can
become a sensitive receiving apparatus. When, however, soul consciousness is
achieved or developing, then this triple instrument is superseded by the intuitional
receptivity of the soul - whose inclusiveness is absolute and who is at-one with the
soul in all forms.
Those disciples who are working along this line are the nurturers of the seed of the
future intuitional civilization, which will come to its full glory in the Aquarian Age. The
intuition is the infallibly sensitive agent, latent in every human being; it is based, as
you know, upon direct knowledge, unimpeded by any instrument normally
functioning in the three worlds. Of this intuitional future age, Christ is the Seed Man,
for "He knew what was in man." Today, a group or a unit of groups can be the
nurturers of the seed of the intuition; the cultivation of sensitivity to telepathic
impression is one of the most potent agencies in developing the coming use of the
intuitive faculty.
The truly telepathic man is the man who is responsive to impressions coming to him
from all forms of life in the three worlds, but he is also equally responsive to
impressions coming to him from the world of souls and the world of the intuition. It
is the development of the telepathic instinct which will eventually make a man a
master in the three worlds, and also in the five worlds of human and superhuman
development. By a process of withdrawal (of occult abstraction) and of concentration
upon the telepathic cult, the whole science of telepathy (as a seed of a future racial
potency) can be developed and understood. This is a process now going forward, and
it is going on in two ways: [36] through the medium of telepathic groups and of
telepathic people, and through the medium of exoteric scientific investigation. The
building of the thought-form which will accustom the race to the idea of telepathic
work is proceeding apace, and the seed of this development is becoming very vital
and powerful and germinating with real rapidity. It is, in the last analysis, the seed of
MASTERHOOD. [37

VI. Group Telepathic Work
I shall now take up with you the subject of united group telepathic work, its
possibilities and the present opportunity, touching upon the dangers involved and
the responsibility which will rest upon your shoulders and upon those of all disciples
who may attempt to work in this way. You need to bear in mind the following three
injunctions:
• First: It is essential that you acquire facility in tuning in on each other with
deepest love and understanding; that you develop impersonality so that when
a brother tunes in on a weakness or a strength, upon a mistake or a right
attitude, it evokes from you no slightest reaction that could upset the
harmony of the group united work as planned; that you cultivate a love which
will ever seek to strengthen and to help, and a power to supplement or
complement each other which will be of use in balancing the group, as a
working unit under spiritual impression. The discovery of a weakness in a
group brother should only produce the evocation of a deeper love; the
discovery that you have made a mistake (if you have) in interpreting a
brother should only prompt you to a renewed vital effort to approach more
closely to his soul; the revelation to you of a brother's strength will indicate
where you can look for help in any hour of your own need. State frankly what
you feel as you work month after month at this task of group rapport,
deliberately tuning out criticism and substituting for it analysis - an analysis
impersonally given; state truthfully what you sense and register. Your
conclusions may be right or wrong, but a definite effort to comply and to
recognize consciously the gained impression should aid the group blending
without undue delay into an instrument of sensitive understanding. If
disciples cannot tune in on each other [38] with ease after long periods of
close relationship, how can they, as a group, tune in on some individual or
some group of individuals unknown to them in their personalities? Unless
such interplay is established fundamentally and unless there is a close
integration between the members who constitute the group, it will not be
possible for constructively useful and spiritually oriented and controlled work
to be properly carried forward and successfully accomplished. But it is a task
which you can accomplish if you will, and real application over a period of
time should enable the group to work smoothly and well together. The three
Rules for beginners, earlier given (A Treatise on White Magic, page 320),
embody the first steps leading to the attitude required in true hierarchical
work; this is the objective of the accepted disciple.
• Secondly: Your constant effort - to be carried forward steadily and slowly -
must be to bring about a group love of such strength that nothing can break it
and no barriers rise up between you; to cultivate a group sensitivity of such a
quality that your diagnosis of conditions will be relatively accurate; to develop
and unfold a group ability to work as a unit, so that there will be nothing in
the inner attitudes of any of the group members which could break into the
carefully established rhythm. For it is quite possible for a member of the
group to retard the work and to hold back the group because he is so
engrossed in his own affairs or in his own ideas of self-development; when
some members cease their activity it does affect the inner group vibration;
when others become slowed up by definite changes in their outer or inner
lives, this requires periods of adjustment and oft of reorganization of the life.
These changes, being externalized, can produce powerful psychological
changes and upset the rhythm of the soul's endeavor. A tried and [39]
experienced disciple will not let such a change upset his inner rhythm, but a

less experienced disciple needs real soul watchfulness to the danger of
sidetracking the life interest from spiritual purposes to personality attentions
and interests.
• Thirdly: Any group work of this kind must be most carefully controlled; any
group effort which seeks to impress the mind of any subject (whether an
individual or a group) must be strenuously guarded as to motive and method;
any group endeavor which involves a united applied effort to effect changes in
the point of view, an outlook on life, or a technique of living must be utterly
selfless, most wisely and cautiously undertaken, and must be kept free from
any personality emphasis, any personality pressure and any mental pressure
which is formulated in terms of individual belief, prejudice, dogmatism or
ideas. I would ask you to study the above few words most carefully.

The moment that there is the least tendency on the part of a group, or of an
individual in a group, to force an issue, to bring so much mental pressure to bear
that an individual or group is helpless under the impact of other minds, you have
what is called "black magic." Right motive may protect the group from any serious
results to themselves, but the effect upon their victim will be definitely serious,
rendering him negative, and with a weakened will.
The result of all true telepathic work and rightly directed effort to "impress" a subject
will be to leave him with a strengthened will to right action, an intensified interior
light, an astral body freer from glamor, and a physical body more vital and purer.
The potency of a united group activity is incredibly powerful. The occult aphorism
that "energy follows thought" is either a statement of a truth or else a meaningless
phrase. [40]
Forget not that the method of work of the Hierarchy is that of impression upon the
minds of Their disciples, of telepathic work carried on with the Master as broadcaster
and the disciple as the recipient of impression and of energy. This reception of
impression and energy has a dual effect:
1. It brings into activity the latent seeds of action and of habits (good or bad),
thus producing revelation, purification, enrichment and usefulness.
2. It vitalizes and galvanizes the personality into a right relation to the soul, to
the environment, and to humanity.
It is necessary for you and for all disciples to grasp the correspondence to this
hierarchical effort and any effort which you may make in order to work as a group of
individuals with groups or individuals. An appreciation of the power which you may
let loose, of the dynamic effect which you may succeed in awakening in the subject
of your directed thought, and of the impression which you may imprint in the mind
and consciousness of the subject should incite you to a guarded purity of life (astral
and physical), to a watchfulness over thoughts and ideas, and to a love which will
safeguard you from all love of power. Thus you will preserve the integrity of those
you seek to help and will be enabled to suggest, to strengthen and to teach
subjectively with no undue influence, no forcing, and no infringement of the liberty
and spiritual franchise of the person concerned. A difficult task, my brothers, but one
to which you are equal, given due attention and obedience to the above three
injunctions as to motive, technique and method. [41]

VII. The Science of Impression
The entire subject of telepathic communication can be approached under a more
subjective designation or name, but one which is interpretive of the more universal
and prior stage than that of direct telepathic reception. The occultist ever approaches
the subject connected with the evolutionary process from the angle of the whole and
then the part, from the periphery to the center, from the universal to the particular.
Among Themselves, the Masters do not deal with telepathy as a science warranting
consideration, endeavor and importation; They are concerned primarily with the
Science of Impression. The term most often employed by Them is the esoteric
equivalent of what the average person means when he says, "I have an impression."
Impression is the subtlest reaction (more or less accurate) to the vibratory mental
activity of some other mind or group of minds, of some whole, as its radiatory
influence affects the unit or aggregate of units.
The first stage of correct telepathic reception is ever the registering of an
impression; it is generally vague at the beginning, but as a thought, idea, purpose or
intention of the sending agent concretizes, it slips into the second stage which
appears as a definite thought-form; finally, that thought-form makes its impact upon
the consciousness of the brain in the location lying just behind the ajna center and
consequently in the area of the pituitary body. It can appear also in the region of the
solar plexus center. But for those Lives Who have surmounted life in the three worlds
and Who are not conditioned by the triple mechanism of the personality, the
impression is the factor of importance; Their consciousness is impressed, and so
sensitive is Their response to the higher impression, that They [42] absorb or
appropriate the impression so that it becomes a part of Their own "impulsive
energy."
This is by no means an easy subject for me to elucidate, and the reasons are two:
1. The members of the Hierarchy (among Whom I have the status of Master)
[Discipleship in the New Age, I, 777] are Themselves in process of learning
this Science of Impression. This They do on the levels of the abstract mind, of
the intuition, or of manas and buddhi.
2. The science is as yet without a vocabulary. It is not limited at any stage by
thought-forms but it is limited by word forms; and it is therefore a difficult
problem for me to pass on any information anent this subtle mode of
communication of which telepathy is in fact but an exoteric externalization.
Impression, as an art to be mastered both from the angle of the impressing agent
and of the impressed recipient, is definitely related to the world of ideas. As far as
our planetary Life is concerned, there are certain great sources of impression and
one or two of them might here be noted; you will thus gain some idea of the subtlety
of the whole subject, of its close relation to energy impacts and of its group
reception as differentiated from individual reception, as is the case in any telepathic
rapport.
1. The impression of Shamballa by:
a. Members of the Great White Lodge on Sirius. The recipients of this impression
are the highest Members of the Great Council, presided over by the Lord of
the World. So subtle is this [43] impression that these Great Lives can only
receive it with accuracy when in full joint conference of the entire Council, and
also after due preparation.
b. From one or other of the constellations which are at any particular time
astrologically en rapport with our planet. This impression can only be received

by the Great Council when sitting in conclave with a majority of its Members
present. This, I would have you note, does not entail the attendance of the
entire Council.
c. From a triangle of circulating energy, emanating from the two planets which -
with our planet, the Earth - form a triangle in any particular cycle. This
impression is received by the three Buddhas of Activity for distribution to the
Hierarchy.
d. From the planet Venus, the Earth's alter ego. This makes its entrance via the
Lord of the World and three of His Council Who are chosen by Him at any
specific time to act as recipients.
These are the major entering impressions, recorded by what is glibly called "the
Universal Mind," the mind of God, our planetary Logos. There are other entering
impressions, but to them I do not refer, as any reference would be meaningless to
you.
2. The impression of the Hierarchy by:
a. Shamballa itself through the medium of groups within the Great Council;
these step down the impression which they register so that the Hierarchy - as
a whole - may cooperate with the purposes intended by those who are
forming the needed Plan. [44]
b. Certain great Lives Who, at specific times and according to cyclic rhythm, or
in times of emergency, are swung into this type of activity. For instance, one
such time would be the Full Moon period, which is a time of reception by the
Hierarchy as well as by Humanity; an instance of the second type of activity
would be the Wesak Festival, or those acute crises when intervention is
required from sources far higher than those with which the recipient is usually
en rapport. Such a crisis is fast approaching.
The first type of impression is rhythmic, recurrent and therefore cumulative in
its intended effects. The second type of impression is the result of invocation
and evocation and is dependent upon both the recipient and the agent.
c. That great group of divine Contemplatives who are trained to act as an
intermediate receptive group between Shamballa and the Hierarchy. They
receive impression from Shamballa and transmit it to the Hierarchy, thus
enabling the Members of the Hierarchy to receive it as "a sharpened
impression" and to register it accurately because the emanating impression
has passed through an area within the divine Mind where it is enhanced by
the trained perception and the determined receptivity of this group. They are
called, in the East, the divine Nirmanakayas. I only mention Their occult name
so that you may learn to recognize Them when you meet reference to Them.
d. The Buddha at the time when the Wesak Festival is celebrated. He then acts
as a focal point or as the "distributor of the impression"; He then has [45]
behind Him (little as you may realize it) the entire impressing force of the
Buddhas of Activity Who are to Shamballa what the Nirmanakayas are to the
Hierarchy.
Let me here interpolate a remark which may prove helpful and illuminating. We are
dealing (as you will undoubtedly have noted) with the reception of impression by
groups or by aggregations of groups composed of living Beings Who have Their own
agents of distribution or impression. The entire evolutionary history of our planet is
one of reception and of distribution, of a taking in and of a giving out. The key to
humanity's trouble (focusing, as it has, in the economic troubles of the past two

hundred years, and in the theological impasse of the orthodox churches) has been to
take and not to give, to accept and not to share, to grasp and not to distribute. This
is the breaking of the Law which has placed humanity in the position of guilt. The
war is the dire penalty which humanity has had to pay for this great sin of
separateness. Impressions from the Hierarchy have been received, distorted,
misapplied and misinterpreted, and the task of the New Group of World Servers is to
offset this evil. These Servers are to humanity what the Buddhas of Activity are to
Shamballa, and the group of divine Contemplatives (the Nirmanakayas) are to the
Hierarchy. It might be stated therefore that:
1. The Buddhas of Activity are Themselves impressed by the WILL of God as it
energizes the entire planetary life.
2. The Nirmanakayas are impressed by the LOVE of God as it demonstrates itself
as the attractive force which impulses the Plan inspired by the Purpose. In
other words, it is the Hierarchy, impelled to action [46] by Shamballa, or the
Will-to-Good, externalizing itself as goodwill.
3. The New Group of World Servers are impressed by the active INTELLIGENCE
of God; they translate this divine impression and step it down in two great
stages, therefore, bringing it into concrete manifestation.
We now carry this conception of divine impression down to the level of the human
consciousness.
3. The impression of Humanity by:
a. The Hierarchy, through the stimulating of ideas. These demonstrate through a
steadily growing and enlightened public opinion.
b. The influence of the Ashrams of the Masters as they affect the aspirants of
the world, the humanitarians and the idealists. These impressing agencies,
being seven in number, constitute seven different streams of impressing
energy which affect the seven ray types. The united Ashrams, forming the
great Ashram of the Christ, affect humanity as a whole; this great united
Ashram works solely through the New Group of World Servers whose
members are on all rays, of all grades of development, and who work in all
the various departments of human living and enterprise.
c. The activity of the New Group of World Servers about which I have already
written in my various pamphlets; therefore repetition is not necessary. (A
Treatise on the Seven Rays, II, 629-751. A Treatise on White Magic, 398-
433.)
It will be obvious to you that I have only touched upon a few, a very few, of the
impressing forces of the planet, and have [47] enumerated only a few of the major
groups which are - in their intrinsic nature - both recipients of impression and agents
later of the impressing agent. When we arrive at the human family, this reciprocal
activity is blocked by human selfishness; it is this "interruption of impression" and
this "interference with the divine circulatory flow" which (as I have said above) is
responsible for sin, for disease, and for all the various factors which make humanity
today what it is. When the free flow of divine energy, of divine interplay and of
spiritual purpose is re-established, then evil will disappear and the will-to-good will
become factual goodwill upon the outer physical plane.
In the statements given above in connection with the three great planetary centers
you have the basis for the new and coming Approach to Divinity which will be known
under the expression: Invocative and Evocative religion. It is this new Science of
Impression which forms the subjective basis and the uniting element which binds

together the entire realm of knowledge, of science and of religion. The fundamental
ideas which underlie these great areas of human thought all emanate from intuitional
levels; they finally condition the human consciousness, evoking man's aspiration to
penetrate deeper into the arcana of all wisdom, for which knowledge is the
preparatory stage. This Science of Impression is the mode of life of the subjective
world which lies between the world of external happenings (the world of appearances
and of exoteric manifestation) and the inner world of reality. This is a point which
should be most carefully taken into the calculations of the occult investigators.
Impressions are received and registered; they form the basis of reflection for those
aspirants who are sensitive enough to their impact and wise enough to record
carefully in consciousness their emanating source. After due practice, this period of
brooding upon the registered [48] impression is followed by another period wherein
the impression begins to take form as an idea; from that point it follows the familiar
course of translation from an idea into a presented ideal; it then comes under the
invocative appeal of the more concrete-minded until it finally precipitates itself into
outer manifestation and takes form. You will see, therefore, that what I am doing is
to take the student a step further into the world of reception and perception and
point him to the more subtle contacts which lie behind those concepts which are
regarded as definitely nebulous and to which we give the name of intuitions.

The Science of Impression - if studied by the disciples in the world and by the New
Group of World - Servers will greatly facilitate the presentation of those ideals which
must and will condition the thinking of the New Age and will eventually produce the
new culture and the new civilized expression which lies ahead of humanity,
superseding the present civilization and providing the next field of expression for
mankind. This science is, in fact, the basis of the theory of relationships and will lead
to the expansion of the idea of right human relations which has hitherto - as a
phrase - been confined to an ideal desire for correct interplay between man and
man, group and group, and nation and nation; it has also hitherto been restricted to
the human society and interplay, and remains as yet a hope and a wish. When,
however, the Science of Impression has been correctly apprehended and has been
brought down to the level of an educational objective, it will be found to be closely
linked to the emerging teaching anent invocation and evocation and will be expanded
to include not only right human relations to the superhuman kingdoms, but right
human relations with the subhuman kingdoms also. It will, therefore, be concerned
with the sensitive response of the entire natural and supernatural world to the "One
in Whom we [49] live and move and have our being"; it will put mankind into a right
relationship with all aspects and expressions of the divine nature, deepening
subjective contact and bringing about a diviner objective manifestation and one more
in line with divine purpose. It will lead to a great shift of the human consciousness
off the levels of emotional and physical life (where the bulk of humanity is focused)
on to the levels of mental perception.
You will understand, consequently, the reason why the Knowers of the world have
ever referred to the dual action of the mind as it is sensitive to the higher
impressions and active in the mental creation of the needed thought-forms. The
mind, rightly trained, will seize upon the fugitive impression, subject it to the
concretizing effect of mental activity, produce the required form, and this, when
correctly created and oriented, will finally lead to the externalizing of the registered
impression, as it took form in an intuition and eventually found its place upon the

mental plane. You will see also why disciples and world workers have to function as
MINDS, as receptive and perceptive intelligences and as creators in mental matter. It
is all related to this Science of Impression with which we have been dealing. You will
note also that this whole process is capable of expansion in the processes of
meditation, so that the aspirant can be sensitive to impression and (because he is
oriented to the world of ideas and is aware of the subtlety and delicacy of the
apparatus required to register the "over-shadowing cloud of knowable things") is
safeguarded from the sensitivity required to register impacts from other minds, good
or bad in their orientation, and from the thought currents of that which is in process
of taking form as well as from the powerful pull or urge of the emotional and desire
reactions of the astral plane and of the emotionally polarized world in which he lives
physically. [50]
More understanding will come also if you grasp the fact that this Science of
Impression is concerned with the activity of the head center as an anchoring center
for the antahkarana, and that the ajna center is concerned with the process of
translating the recorded intuition into a form (through recognition of and reaction to
a mental thought-form) and its subsequent direction, as an ideal objective, into the
world of men. In the early stages and until the third initiation, the Science of
Impression is concerned with the establishing of a sensitivity (an invocative
sensitivity) between the Spiritual Triad (temporarily expressing itself through the
abstract mind and the soul or the Son of Mind) and the concrete mind. This mental
triangle is a reflection, in time and space, of the Monad and of the two higher
aspects of the Triad, and is reflected (after the process of invocation and a
succeeding process of evocation) in another triad - that of the lower mind, the soul
and the vital body. When the relation between the lower and the higher mind is
correctly and stable established, you have the swinging into activity of the lowest
triad connected with the Science of Impression - the head center, the ajna center
and the throat center.
In the above I have given you an interesting and brief elucidation of the technique to
be applied to the energizing of the centers in the human body. I would remind you
that what is true of the individual disciple must be and is true of that great disciple -
Humanity, the entire human family. It is also true, as an outgrowth of this idea, of all
the three planetary centers: Shamballa, the Hierarchy and Humanity. The name
Science of Impression is that given to the process whereby the establishment of the
required relationship in all these units of life takes place. The Technique of
Invocation and Evocation is the name given to the mode or method whereby the
desired relationship is brought about. [51]
The Creative Work is the name given to the manifestation of the results of the two
above processes. The three aspects of the Technique of Invocation and Evocation
with which the average disciple should concern himself are those of the building of
the antahkarana, the correct use of the lower mind in its two higher functions (the
holding of the mind steady in the light and the creation of the desired thought-
forms), and the process of precipitation whereby the impression is enabled
eventually to take tangible form.
In the above exegesis I have given you much food for thought in connection with
telepathic possibilities; it all fits into the theme of world service as it is to be applied
in the expansion of the human consciousness on a large scale. This is one of the
major tasks of the New Group of World Servers. [52]

VIII. The Supreme Science of Contact
It would be useful if you attempted to master and to assimilate what I have to
impart anent the three great sciences which form the three modes of expression of
what we might term the SUPREME SCIENCE OF CONTACT. These three sciences are
all equally interdependent and all related to the art of responsiveness. They are:
1. The Science of Impression - The will-to-be.
• Relation to the Spiritual Triad.
• Source of emanation - Shamballa.
• Connected with the abstract mind.
2. The Science of Invocation and Evocation - Love or attraction.
• Relation to the soul in all forms.
• Source of emanation (at this time) - The Hierarchy.
• Connected with the lower mind, as the agent of the soul.
3. The Science of Telepathy - Mind. Human intelligence.
• Relation to the personality.
• Source of emanation - Humanity itself.
• Connected with the head center.
You will see how all these pairs of opposites play their part, exemplifying the
dualistic nature of our planetary Life: [53]
1. The abstract mind and the lower mind.
2. The soul and the lower mind.
3. The lower mind and the head center.
Each of them acts as an invocative agent and produces evocation. All act as
recipients and as transmitters, and all of them together establish the group
interrelation and the circulation of the energies which are the distinctive
characteristic of the entire world of force.
One point you all need to grasp is that the progressing disciple does not move into
new fields or areas of awareness, like a steady marching forward from one plane to
another (as the visual symbols of the theosophical literature would indicate). What
must be grasped is that all that IS is ever present. What we are concerned with is
the constant awakening to that which eternally IS, and to what is ever present in the
environment but of which the subject is unaware, owing to short-sightedness. The
aim must be to overcome the undue concentration upon the foreground of daily life
which characterizes most people, the intense preoccupation with the interior states
or moods of the lower self which characterizes the spiritually minded people and the
aspirants, and the imperviousness or lack of sensitivity which characterizes the mass
of men. The Kingdom of God is present on Earth today and forever has been, but
only a few, relatively speaking, are aware of its signs and manifestations. The world
of subtle phenomena (called formless, because unlike the physical phenomena with
which we are so familiar) is ever with us and can be seen and contacted and proved
as a field for experiment and experience and activity if the mechanism of perception
is developed as it surely can be. The sounds and sights of the heavenly world (as the
mystics call it) are as clearly perceived by [54] the higher initiate as are the sights
and sounds of the physical plane as you contact it in your daily round of duties. The

world of energies, with its streams of directed force and its centers of concentrated
light, is likewise present, and the eye of the see-er can see it, just as the eye of the
mental clairvoyant can see the geometrical pattern which thoughts assume upon the
mental plane, or as the lower psychic can contact the glamors, the illusions and
delusions of the astral world. The subjective realm is vitally more real than is the
objective, once it is entered and known. It is simply (how simple to some and how
insuperably difficult to others, apparently!) a question of the acceptance, first of all,
of its existence, the development of a mechanism of contact, the cultivation of the
ability to use this mechanism at will, and then inspired interpretation.

It might be said that consciousness itself, which is the goal - on this planet - of all
the evolutionary process, is simply the demonstrated result of the Science of
Contact. It is likewise the goal in some form or other and at some stage or other of
all planetary existences within the solar system itself. The unfoldment of this
conscious response is, in reality, the growth of the sensitive awareness of the
planetary Logos HIMSELF. The human mechanism and its ability to respond to its
environment (as science well knows) has been developed in response to an inner
urge, present in every human being and in all forms of life, and to the "pull" and
magnetic effect of the surrounding environment. Step by step, the forms of life upon
the physical plane, down through the ages, have unfolded one sense after another;
one form of sensitive response after another becomes possible as the mechanism is
produced, until the human being can receive impressions from the physical plane
and rightly interpret them; can respond to the emotional contacts of the astral plane
and succumb to them or [55] surmount them; and can become telepathic to the
world of the mental plane, thus sharing - physically, emotionally and mentally - in
the life and contacts of the three worlds which constitute his environment and in
which he is submerged whilst in incarnation. What he gets out of this life of constant
impression is largely dependent upon his power to invoke his environment and draw
from it (in evocative response) what he needs in all the various departments of his
being. This, in its turn, forces him - whether he likes it or not - to produce an effect
upon other people; this can be far more potent for good or evil, and from the
telepathic angle, than he likes to think or can conceive. You see, therefore, how
these sciences of Impression, of Invocation and Evocation, and of Telepathy are
naturally concerned with what is inherent in man and in his relation to his
environment and circumstances.
The germ or embryonic capacity for all types of planetary contact is inherent in every
man and will not be frustrated in the long run. In this knowledge of goals already
achieved in the three worlds lies the guarantee of achievement in the more
subjective worlds which are present within the aspirant's surroundings but to which
he remains as yet unawakened and unenlightened. I am seeking to make the matter
as simple as I can, for much of the abstract formulations of the occult sciences and
the academic psychologists are incident to the over-activity of men's minds and
emotional natures. If you can grasp certain broad and relatively simple facts and
recognize that you possess the key or the clue in your already developed capacities,
then you will go forward with simplicity, making no undue intellectual difficulties
when dealing with these more subtle phases of your ever-existent environment. It is,
in the last analysis, just a question as to what "impresses" you at any given moment,
and then in what manner it conditions you. [56]
You will see, therefore, how much that I have already said links up with the teaching
I have given upon the Points of Revelation. In the very condensed summation of the
Science of Impression, I touched briefly upon the three great groups of Lives that
are constantly under "impression" and which, in their turn, become "impressing

agents." There is little that can be added to this theme with profit at this time; what
has already been given should be studied and related to the teaching on the Points of
Revelation. (Discipleship in the New Age, Volume II, Section 3.)
Revelation is a generic term covering all the responses to the activities of the eye of
the mind, the eye of the soul, and the "insight" of the Universal Mind which contact
with the Monad gives. Sight is the greatest of all the developments in this world
period in which the Logos is seeking to bring the subhuman kingdoms to the point
where human vision is theirs, to bring humanity to the point where spiritual vision is
developed and hierarchical insight is the normal quality of the initiate sight, and to
bring the Members of the Hierarchy to the point where universal perception is Theirs.
Therefore, it might be said that:
1. Through the door of individualization the subhuman kingdoms pass to human
vision, leading to mental contact and intelligent impression.
2. Through the door of initiation humanity passes to spiritual vision, leading to
soul contact and spiritual impression.
3. Through the door of identification the Hierarchy passes to universal vision,
leading to monadic contact and extra-planetary impression.
Each time that there is a fresh vision of a compelling and conditioning nature, it is
the result of invocation by the [57] one seeking the new impression. When this
invocative spirit is present, the results are inevitable and sure and the response
evoked cannot be stopped. This is the basis of all the success of desire (material or
otherwise), aspiration, prayer and meditation. Always we get - in time and space -
what we invoke; and the knowledge of this fact, scientifically applied, will be one of
the great liberating forces for humanity. [58]

IX. Expanding Areas of Conscious Interaction
The training given by the Masters in Their Ashrams to Their disciples has one main
objective: to increase, develop and enable them to utilize in service their inherent
and innate sensitivity. Let us, as we discuss these matters, avoid that much
overworked word "vibration" and use instead the more simple and more easily
understood word "impact". Response to impact is something we all register. Our five
senses have opened to all people five great realms from which impact comes, and we
are so familiar with them all that our response is now automatic and, though
registered, is not consciously so, unless there is a planned reason and direction
intended. We respond similarly and as automatically to emotional stimuli, and rapidly
(very rapidly) the race is reaching out towards mental telepathy. Some few are
beginning to work along the lines of spiritual telepathy. Few do more than register
occasionally contacts emanating from a high source, and the result is usually also
over-mixed with personality reactions.
Contact, with resultant impact from the soul, is also quite rapidly developing, hence
the necessity for my laying the foundations of further knowledge which will clarify
still higher contact, emanating from the Spiritual Triad and opening up areas of
interaction hitherto known only to the Hierarchy. I refer here to the teaching which I
have given out through a group of my disciples anent the Antahkarana. (Education in
the New Age. A Treatise on the Seven Rays, Volume V.) All such developing contacts
involve conditions covered by the two words: Contact and Impact. [59]
1. Contact can be defined (for our particular purposes) as recognition of an
environment, an area of the hitherto unknown, of that which has somehow
been evoked, of a something other which has made its presence felt. This
something other than the Perceiver has usually been earlier sensed, has been
propounded into a theoretical possibility, has later been invoked by the
directed and conscious attention of the one who has sensed its presence, and
finally contact is made.
2. Impact is something more than simply registering contact. It develops into
conscious interaction; it conveys later information; it is revelatory in nature,
and can be defined in its initial stages as the guarantee to the one who
responds to it of a new area for exploration and for spiritual adventure, and
as the indication of a wider field wherein consciousness may expand more and
more and register increasingly the divine purpose waiting to be more fully
known.
Therefore, from the more normal field of what we may call ordinary telepathic
perception (just now coming to recognition by ordinary science), through a slowly
learnt process of invocation and evocation, to a state of consciousness distinguished
by a trained sensitivity, the disciple moves. He unfolds a spiritual recognition which
is controlled, understood, and directed to useful hierarchical ends. In these words,
you have a very simple definition of the process to which we give, technically, the
name: The Science of Impression.
Another point to remember is that this science is the basic Science of Sensitivity; it is
the art of all responsiveness to phenomena and is peculiarly applied to the reaction,
the recognition, the responsiveness, and the registration of all [60] phenomena to be
found throughout the cosmic physical plane. This is the plane whereon our entire
threefold planetary Life finds expression and which we have subdivided (for the sake
of clear thinking) into the seven planes (so called) of our solar system - from what
we call our lowest physical plane up to our highest plane, the logoic. In the earlier
stages of responsiveness to the two phases of contact and impact, the first task is to

develop the needed apparatus of contact, the medium of learning, the mechanism of
registration, and then learning to use it constructively and intelligently. This work
proceeds from cycle to cycle, in the earliest stages, with no conscious intention on
the part of the unit of life, thus developing; yet field after field of consciousness is
slowly recorded, and area after area of the surrounding physical, mental and spiritual
worlds come within the arena of perception, and are mastered and controlled, until
eventually the unit of life (I know not what else to call it) becomes the human being,
self-directed, an individual. Finally the man becomes the Master, controlling and
directing within the periphery of His wide awareness, in consonance with the divine
Mind and Plan.
But - and this is a point I seek to impress upon you - humanity, subjected to this
constant process of expansion from the emergence of the fourth kingdom in nature,
the human, has now reached the stage where it can begin to pass out of the control
of what has been called the Law of Triple Response into a new phase of unfoldment
where a recognized dualism dominates. This is a most important statement. Let me
word it in this way and let me commend to you a very careful consideration of my
words. I will express what I seek to impart in certain short sentences and in
tabulation form: [61]
1. The advanced man in the three worlds is conscious of two inherent triplicities:
a. The lower man - Physical body - Astral nature - Mind.
b. The three periodical vehicles - Monad - Soul - Personality.
2. Soul and personality have made contact. He is now technically soul-infused.
Two periodical vehicles have been at-oned. Three lower vehicles and the soul
are united.
3. The etheric body is at the point of assuming great power. It can now be
consciously used as a transmitter of:
a. Energy and forces, consciously directed.
b. Impacts from the highest of the periodical vehicles, working through
its instrument, the Spiritual Triad.
4. The etheric body is, therefore, the agent consciously directed, of the rapidly
integrating spiritual unity. It can convey into the brain the needed energies
and that occult information which together make a man a Master of the
Wisdom and eventually a Christ - all-inclusive in His developed attractive and
magnetic power.
Elsewhere I made the following statement which, as you study it, will summarize the
above detailed analysis. I said, defining impression, that it "concerns the
engendering of a magnetic aura on which the highest impressions can play." This
might also serve as a definition of the art of invocation and evocation. As the man
(for we will not consider this science apart from him, as it would include too vast a
field) becomes sensitive to his environment, as the forces of [62] evolution play
upon him and lead him on from stage to stage, from point to point, from plane to
plane, and from height to height, he becomes enriched and increasingly magnetic. As
this attractive or magnetic force increases, he himself becomes invocative; this
outgoing demand, emanating from or through the aura which he has engendered
brings to him a developing revelation. This revelation, in its turn, enriches the
magnetic field of his aura so that he becomes a revealing center to those whose field
of experience and aura need the stimulus of his practiced assurance.

Finally, it might be said that the entire human kingdom will eventually be a major
magnetic center upon our planet, invoking all the higher kingdoms upon the formless
planes and evoking all the lower or subhuman kingdoms upon the planes of form.
Some day, two-thirds of the human family will be sensitive to impacts coming from
the Mind of God, as that Mind fulfils its intentions and carries out its purposes within
our planetary ring-pass-not. In its turn, humanity will provide the area of mind
within whose ring-pass-not the subhuman kingdoms will find the correspondence of
the Universal Mind which they need for their unfoldment; man, as you well know, is
the macrocosm for the microcosm of the lower kingdoms in nature. This is the goal
of all human service.
What I have said up to this point anent the Science of Impression, if read also in
connection with the teaching on the Points of Revelation, (Discipleship in the New
Age, Volume II, Section 3.) will convey much enlightenment. However, deep
reflection is called for. The Science of Impression might be regarded, in the last
analysis, as the fundamental science of consciousness itself, for the result of contact
and impact leads to the awakening and the unfoldment of consciousness and of that
growing awareness which distinguishes every form throughout the manifested [63]
world. Every form has its own area of awareness, and evolution is the process
whereby forms respond to contact, react to impact, and pass on to greater
development, usefulness and effectiveness. The Law of Evolution and the Science of
Impression cover the unfoldment of consciousness and bring about adaptability to
the immanent soul. Modern science, through its work in the fields of psychology and
medicine (to mention only two) and its experiments with forms which have
established the modes of constructing and bringing into being the varying
mechanisms of contact found in the different kingdoms of nature, has mastered
much of the evolutionary development of the exoteric response apparatus. With all
this we shall not attempt to deal; it is correct as far as it goes. We shall confine
ourselves to a consideration of the contacts and impacts which confront the disciples
and initiates of the world today, as they work in the Hierarchy and through an
Ashram, and whose path of advance is as a shining light which shineth ever more
until full enlightenment has been achieved. [64]

X. Sequential Revelation of Relationships
I would like to refer you back to page 52 where I outlined this extraordinary science
which is - inherently in itself - the evidence of evolution, of the essential dualism in
manifestation, and the testimony, unalterable and incontrovertible, to the
unfoldment of consciousness. At the same time, it proceeds upon the basic premise
that the various phases of consciousness which are steadily and sequentially
revealed in time and space are (from the point of view of the Eternal Now) the
sumtotal of the states of consciousness of the "One in Whom we live and move and
have our being." All these phases of conscious acceptance of existent phenomena
and their related reactions are, to Sanat Kumara, what a day's experience and
reactions or the current life experiences are to the intelligent man - only vastly more
enveloping and comprehensive.
There were a number of points to which I did not refer then, but which I would like
to take up now in the interests of clarity and understanding. I have called this
science of rapport and of reaction, the Supreme Science of Contact. That is
essentially what it is. The reaction to this contact, whether cosmic as in the case of
Sanat Kumara, or planetary as in the case of the Members of the Hierarchy, is
nevertheless limited and circumscribed (from the point of view of the informed
aspirant), is responsible for the creation of Karma or the setting in motion of causes
which must unalterably have their effects - these effects being negated and rendered
useless (or innocuous, if you prefer that word) when the entity concerned brings to
the engendered circumstances the needed intelligence, wisdom, [65] intuition or will.
Ponder on this. Consciousness is inherent in all forms of life. That is an occult
platitude. It is an innate potency which forever accompanies life in manifestation.
These two, related through manifestation, are in reality atma-buddhi, spirit-reason,
dedicated for the term of the creative period to a simultaneous functioning; the first
result of their relation is the appearance of that which will enable the Lord of the
World to express His Own unknown inscrutable purpose.
During the cycle of manifestation, this combination of life-awareness, spirit-reason,
atma-buddhi, is the product of the multiplicity in unity of which we hear so much -
demonstrating as activity, quality, ideology, rationality, relationship, unity, and many
other expressions of the divine nature. In the earlier part of A Treatise on the Seven
Rays, I spoke of life, quality and appearance, mentioning the major triplicity which
could be and is already proven and apparent to man. Quality was emphasized as the
second aspect, not because on all planes and for all time that is so, but because at
the present point in human evolution, quality plus activity appear to be the two lower
aspects of divine manifestation. Already, however, two others are, if anything,
superseding them in the consciousness of thinking humanity - relationship and ideas.
Still others will be rapidly added as the consciousness of man is more effectively
employed.
The Science of Contact will not only reveal quality, but is revealing the lines of
relationship which underlie all manifestation and of which the etheric body is the
symbol. It is also rendering man sensitive to ideas as the unfolding intellect of man
permits it. The reaction of humanity to these two revelations (which come, if you
could but realize it, as the result, the reward, of contact and of the impact of life-
reason upon that manifestation which has always been present though unrealized)
will bring about vast [66] changes and more far-reaching results than has the
reaction to quality. Curiously enough, the discovery of quality as the second aspect
in manifestation (later to be superseded), called for, and developed, the critical
faculty in man; this critical faculty (so destructive in its present use) will be correctly

expressed when the nature of relationship is better grasped and the true function of
ideas is properly understood.
This Supreme Science of Contact governs all reactions to impact. This statement
includes the cosmic reactions of Sanat Kumara down to the scarcely discernible
reactions (invisible almost even to the eye of the seer) of the infinitesimal atom. For
the sake of clarity, I divided this science into three major divisions, basing them
upon the reactions of the three major planetary centers to their environment. This is
a point which I would have you carefully bear in mind. I could write a treatise longer
than this one purely on the creation of the response apparatus which each of these
three centers of divine life-reason had to form in order to make the needed contact
and to interpret correctly. There are many paradoxes in what I am here giving you,
and apparently some contradictions where orthodox occultism is concerned, but that
is ever the case as the teaching expands in content and the earlier all-inclusive facts
are seen to be minor aspects of still greater facts. You can see, therefore, the
significance and the importance of the dictum in The Secret Doctrine that the
Hierarchy and all in the Council Chamber of Sanat Kumara (or Shamballa) have
invariably passed through the human stage of evolution, for only human beings can
perfectly blend and express life-reason, and only human intellect can consciously
create what is needed in order to bring the needed stages of manifested life into
being. [67]
Here again emerges another reason for the importance of the "center which we call
the race of men"; upon the shoulders of humanity rests unbelievable responsibility.
Therefore, whether we are dealing with simple telepathy, or with invocation and
evocation, or with impression, we are in reality considering the effect of life-reason
as it manifests in relation to the available and suitable environment. Note this
phrase. All this takes place through men in process of being made perfect, through
men who have attained a relative perfection, and through men who - in the majority
of cases - arrived at perfection elsewhere than in this present manifesting cycle. This
should indicate to you the potentiality hidden in the very lowest of the human family,
and the future of wonder and of usefulness which lies ahead for each and all in due
time and after due effort.
Technically speaking, it is the Hierarchy which is "impressed" from Shamballa, and
Humanity which is reached by the Hierarchy via the method of invocation and
evocation. Within the human family two things occur as the result of this received
and recognized activity of a phase of the Science of Contact.
1. Telepathic relationship is set up. This, my brother, has ever existed between
members of the human family and, as previously explained, is of two kinds: Solar
plexus telepathy, instinctual, uncontrolled, widely prevalent and allied to many of the
surprising activities of forms of life other than the human, i. e., the instinct of the
homing pigeon or the method whereby cats and dogs and horses will find their
homes over immense distances. The telepathic interplay between a mother and her
children is instinctual and seated in the animal nature. Mental telepathy is now being
recognized and studied. This is the activity and rapport established from mind to
mind; it also includes the telepathic response to current [68] thought-forms and
thought conditions in the world today. Interest in this is already very great.
2. Intuitional telepathy begins to manifest increasingly among advanced human
beings in all lands and all races. This indicates soul contact and the consequent
awakening of group consciousness, for sensitivity to intuitional impressions has to do
only with group concerns.

This Science of Contact governs relations within our entire planetary life and
includes, for instance, the rapport being established between humanity and the
domesticated animals. These animals are to their own kingdom what the New Group
of World Servers is to humanity. The New Group of World Servers is the linking
bridge and the mode of communication between the Hierarchy (the fifth kingdom)
and Humanity (the fourth kingdom) under the present divine Plan; the domesticated
animals fulfil, therefore, an analogous function between Humanity (the fourth
kingdom) and the animal kingdom (the third). These analogies are often fertile fields
of illumination.
As regards Shamballa, the impression there received is not the result of invocation
which in due course evokes extra-planetary response, as is the case between the
Hierarchy and Shamballa, and the Hierarchy and Humanity, with certain changes
during the process of stepping down or of descent. That which impresses Shamballa
and is received by the Grand Council of the Lord of the World, comes via Sanat
Kumara because HE is in close contact with other planetary Logoi or groups of
planetary Logoi, wielding a united, focused, intelligent Will. It is Sanat Kumara
Whose task it is to impress the Lives Who meet periodically in the Council Chamber
with the next phase of unfolding Purpose. This Purpose is later "occultly reduced" or
stepped down until it emerges as the hierarchical Plan. This Plan is contingent upon
imminence, atmic realization [69] and pure reason, as the Hierarchy has termed
these three "aspects of reaction" to impression from Shamballa. Let me make myself
clear. The Hierarchy is no group of mystical workers; only those aspects of divine
Purpose which can be immediately grasped and developed and which are patently
valuable to humanity - when presented in right form by the Hierarchy - are
registered by Them. They know what consciously to "repudiate" as it is occultly
called, and They act ever in response to a Law of Imminence or of occult prevision
which is almost unrecognizable and indefinable by advanced humanity. The words,
"atmic realization" are most interesting, for they refer to the quality and the mass of
will energy which could be made available by the pledged and unified Hierarchy to
carry out the imminent Plan. Never forget that in considering Shamballa and the
Plan, we are thinking entirely within the limits of the expression of the WILL aspect
of the Lord of the World, and this - except for advanced initiates - is well-nigh
impossible. This factor has to be accepted theoretically, even if not yet understood.
To these two unalterable requirements the Hierarchy contributes the faculty of pure
reason, which is the governing faculty of the Hierarchy and which brings into activity
the quality to which man has erroneously given the name of "love". This emphasizes
the sentimental aspect and signifies to the majority, very largely, simply the
sentimental and emotional aspect, which is entirely of an astral nature. Pure reason,
which is the supreme characteristic of the Members of the Hierarchy, will ever
express itself in right action and right human relations, and that will manifest - when
present - what love in reality is. Pure love is a quality or effect of pure reason.
The pure reason of the hierarchical response is needed for the grasping and the
comprehension of the Purpose as [70] it works out through the Plan sponsored at
any one time by the Hierarchy, and the quality of pure love is needed and demanded
(even if unrealized) by a waiting humanity.
This "impression" emanating from Shamballa takes the form of a focused emanation
which employs the higher aspect of the antahkarana as its channel of contact. I refer
not here to the thread as built by the disciple between the mental unit and the
abstract mind. I refer to its continuation through the buddhic and atmic levels of
consciousness into the area of magnetized consciousness (I use this word as we
have not yet the necessary word to express the exact nature of this higher

awareness, and the term "identification" seems somewhat unsuitable) which
surrounds and protects the true Shamballa center. It is essential that you here bear
in mind that just as the mass of men do not know, recognize or respond to the
Hierarchy, so - within the Hierarchy itself - you have a group analogous to this mass
of men. There are many lesser members of the Hierarchy and many, very many,
disciples who do not know, recognize or as yet respond to the influence or the
potency of Shamballa.
Within the Hierarchy, the Science of Impression conditions the relation between
senior and junior members in the various Ashrams. All do not respond in the same
way, for in its higher aspects it is a science in process of mastering. It might be said,
in order that you may understand more easily, that "impression" governs and
conditions all those within the Hierarchy whose abstract mind is highly developed. It
is not fully developed in the case of many disciples in the Ashram, and hence only
certain Members of the Hierarchy (the Masters, the Adepts and Initiates of the third
degree) are permitted to know the details of the Plan; these are protected by means
of this very Science [71] of Impression. The remaining members of the Hierarchy
take their orders from their seniors.
I would ask you to remember that, in our planetary development, the emphasis of
the entire evolutionary process is on the MIND and on the various aspects of the
mind - intelligence, mental perception, the Son of Mind, the lower mind, the abstract
mind, the mind as will, the Universal Mind. The three which are of major importance
and which form an esoteric triangle requiring to be brought into a vital interrelation
are the Son of Mind, the abstract mind, and the Universal Mind. They are, when fully
related and active, the factors which engineer divine purpose and step it down into
such form that we call it the hierarchical Plan and can act upon it. Only when the
initiate has attained, through monadic contact, a touch of the Universal Mind can the
Purpose be sensed by him; this involves also the development of the abstract mind,
plus the residue of mental perception which the Son of Mind (the soul) has
bequeathed to him; through all this unfoldment he can join the group who are the
Formulators of the Plan. We are dealing here with most difficult and complex
matters, inherent in the initiate consciousness and for which we have as yet no
correct terminology. Also, the average aspirant has no idea what is the nature of the
awareness or the reactions to contact of Those Who have passed beyond the third
initiation; these limitations of the average student must constantly be borne in mind.
The Science of Invocation and Evocation - which embodies the technique of interplay
within the Hierarchy itself, to a certain degree between Shamballa and the Hierarchy,
and to an increasing extent between Humanity and the Hierarchy - is based entirely
on a sense of relation. Therefore only a certain level of conscious Lives can invoke
Shamballa and evoke response, and this because They [72] have Themselves
developed some of the aspects of that type of mental understanding which is the
hierarchical expression of the Universal Mind. The light and futile talk of certain
writers and thinkers anent the cosmic consciousness, and their flippant use of such
phrases as "tuning in with the Infinite" or "tapping the Universal Mind" serve only to
show how very little is known in reality about the responses and the reactions of
those of high initiate rank or of those on the highest levels of hierarchical life.
True capacity to invoke and evoke (within initiate ranks) is based upon a mysterious
development - impossible before the time of the third initiation - of the esoteric
sense. The active use of the esoteric sense in the occult training offered to aspirants,
disciples and initiates of lesser degree produces certain changes within the brain,
with corresponding changes within the buddhic vehicle; these changes enable one at
will (after the third Initiation of Transfiguration) to contact the Being, Life, or the

monadic POINT of contact with Whom he will be increasingly affiliated, or the
Member of the Hierarchy Whom he may desire to consult. It does not involve the use
of speech or words but is simply a technical method whereby an initiate within the
Hierarchy or en rapport with Shamballa can make his presence felt and certain ideas
can be presented by him. Upon this I will not further enlarge.
For average humanity, the development of the intuition is the lower correspondence
to this type of esoteric sense employed by initiates of high degree - or this mode of
perceptive intercourse, as it is sometimes called. Within the Ashrams, advanced
disciples are taught how to discover within themselves and to use this new potency
and thus develop the needed mechanism. They can know simultaneously both the
demand and the answer or response which their invocation application has evoked.
All disciples who [73] have taken the third initiation have the power to invoke and to
be evoked, and hence this technique is not permitted to those of lower status. A
highly developed discriminative faculty is here needed. It is in reality an advanced
part of the technique whereby - in the earliest stages - the disciple is permitted to
attract the attention of the Master. This he does through the very importunity of his
desire; later, through the use of his acquired knowledge, he proceeds to what is
called "the regulated nature of his appeal." The appeal is then less regulated by
desire and more under the control of will.
I am not here dealing with invocation and evocation as it is carried on between
Humanity and the Hierarchy. I gave much along this line when I made public the
various Invocations whereby I have been attempting to substitute the invocative
method for the selfish use of prayer and the limiting mode of the average meditation
process. It is a slow process by means of which this method of intercourse must be
learnt and mastered, and no textbook or information on the subject is of much use.
Nor am I going to deal with the ordinary telepathy prevalent among men and natural
to so many, as this has been dealt with earlier in this book. But at this point I should
like to emphasize something which applies to every human being. When animal-man
passed through the door of individualization and became a human being he came
possessed of an innate potency of sight; for aeons he has seen in the three worlds,
and many have for several lives sought after the vision which stabilizes the aspirant
upon the Path. Through the door of initiation, having attained the mystical vision,
each aspirant will become aware of that within himself which permits of a spiritual
perception of such an expansive nature that he gets his first real and individual
glimpse of the divine Plan; from that moment his entire life is altered. Later (and this
[74] I cannot expect the student to understand; if he thinks he does, he is being
misled by words), he will pass through the door of identification. This is a perfectly
meaningless phrase, since its significance is most carefully guarded. Symbolically
speaking and in order to preserve the concept of this door in the mind of humanity,
true esoteric meetings are entered on the password. Only the WORD can enter
through this door - this highest and widest of all doors. Once through that door and
once eligible to the Council Chamber of the Great Lord, the Initiate will comprehend
what is meant by "monadic impression." It is not impression by a Monad (that
meaningless term) upon the brain of a man who has constructed the antahkarana
and passed the fourth initiation. It is an innate responsiveness to the Purpose of the
Universal Mind of the One in Whom we live and move and have our being. [75]

XI. Results of Contact and Receptivity
I am not indicating in any way how an individual can become telepathic. All those
developments within the area or region of progressive contacts are only useful and
truly available when they are developed normally and naturally and are not the
result of premature unfoldment. When the development is premature there is always
the danger of wrong, erroneous and self-centered interpretations. The telepathic
information can be of purely selfish or personal import and that type of telepathy has
no place in what I am seeking to impart. People today frequently evidence a
telepathic tendency or capacity. They tune in (a phrase they regard as more
euphonious than the words "telepathic rapport") with something or someone, though
they know not what it is. Everything that they purport to register is regarded by
them as of major importance: it is usually self-related and not due to their high point
of spiritual unfoldment which warrants their being the custodians of mysterious
spiritual messages - usually of a most unimportant and platitudinous nature. There
are many sources of these messages and it might be useful if I here mentioned some
of them; what I have to say may prove to be of value to the general occult public.
1. Messages emanating from the relatively nice, well-trained subconscious
nature of the recipient. These well up from the subconscious but are regarded
by the recipient as coming from an outside source. Introspective people
frequently penetrate into the layer of subconscious recollection and are quite
unaware of so doing. Their interest in themselves is so intense. Not knowing
that they have done this, [76] they regard what they find as unusual,
beautiful and important, and then proceed to formulate it into messages,
which they expect their friends and the general public to regard as spiritually
based. These messages are normally innocuous, sometimes beautiful,
because they are a mixture of what the recipients have read and gathered
from the mystical writing or have heard from Christian sources and the Bible.
It is really the content of their right thinking along spiritual lines and can do
no one any harm, but is of no true importance whatsoever. It accounts,
however, for eighty-five percent (85%) of the so-called telepathic or inspired
writings so prevalent at this time.
2. Impressions from the soul, which are translated into concepts and written
down by the personality; the recipient is deeply impressed by the relatively
high vibration which accompanies them, forgetting that the vibration of the
soul is that of a Master, for the soul is a Master on its own plane. These are
true soul impressions but usually have in them nothing new or of major
importance; they are, again, the result of past ages of soul development (as
far as the personality is concerned); they are, therefore, that which an
awakening personality has contributed to the soul of the good, the true and
the beautiful, plus that which has entered into the personality consciousness
as a result of soul contact. This accounts for eight percent (8%) of the
writings and communications put before the general public by aspirants
today.
3. Teachings given by a senior or more advanced disciple on the inner planes to
a disciple under training or who has just been admitted into an Ashram.
These teachings bear the impress and conclusions of the senior disciple and
are frequently of value; they may - and often do - contain information of
which the recipient is totally unaware. The criterion here is that nothing
(literally nothing) will concern [77] the recipient, either spiritually or mentally
or in any other way connected with his personality, nor will they contain the
platitudes of the religious background of the recipient. They will account for

five percent (5%) of the teaching given, but this is in relation to the entire
world and the percentage does not refer to some one occult group, one
religious faith or one nation. The recognition of this is of vital importance.
4. Communications from a Master to His disciple. This accounts for two percent
(2%) of the entire telepathic receptivity, demonstrated by humanity as a
whole throughout the entire world. Western students would here do well to
remember that the subjective Eastern student is far more prone to telepathic
receptivity than is his Western brother; this has a definite bearing on all the
above classifications, which is somewhat humiliating for the Western mystic
and occult student. The World Scriptures emanate from another department
of the second ray teaching faculty. In this statement I do not include The Old
Testament except such passages as the Twenty-third Psalm and certain
passages out of the Prophets, particularly the Prophet Isaiah. The World
Scriptures were written for mystics, occupied with beauty, comfort, and
encouragement, and were not written for occultists. I would call this to your
attention.

In this section of the teaching I am dealing with the nature and results of contact, of
receptivity. I am giving no rules for individual development, and would not, if I
could. Humanity today is developing receivers of every kind of concept, beginning
with the lowest of them all - the masses of men who, through demagogues, the
newspapers, the radio, books and lectures, are conditioned by many minds,
according to their ray type of receptivity. As true intelligence develops and as love
begins to permeate human thinking, these conditioning factors will get increasingly
[78] less attractive. This means when the soul becomes of greater life importance
and man-made ideas (if such a phrase is permissible) of less importance. There are,
in reality, no man-made ideas. There are only ideas as grasped by the intelligentsia
and then as "stepped down" by humanity's constant reaction to glamor, to emotional
or astral conclusions, and to selfish interpretations.
It must be remembered that the activity of all these "impressing agencies" is felt in a
wide and general sense throughout the entire planet and the planetary aura. No
kingdom in nature escapes this impact, and it is thus that the purpose of the Lord of
the World is carried out. Being, Coherence and Activity are thus blended into one
created and creative whole; life, quality and appearance respond unitedly to the
imposed intention of the planetary Logos and yet, at the same time, remain
creatively free as regards their reaction to these contacted impressions; this reaction
is necessarily dependent upon the type and quality of the mechanism which registers
the impression. This mechanism has been developed by the life within the form
throughout the creative period and - as far as the time element has been involved -
the indwelling entity in any kingdom in nature has been free, and the time has been
long or short, and the reaction to impression has been rapid or slow, according to the
will of the controlling life. In the mineral kingdom, this reaction is very slow, for
inertia or tamas controls the spiritual life within the mineral form; in the vegetable
kingdom, it is more rapid, and under the invocative appeal of the lives in that
kingdom the deva world is invoked and greatly aids and hastens the unfoldment of
the vegetable consciousness; this is one reason for its relative sinlessness and
extraordinary purity.
The major impression registered in the second kingdom of nature emanates from the
angel worlds and from the [79] deva hierarchy. The angels and devas are to the
vegetable kingdom what the spiritual Hierarchy is to humanity. This is, of course, a
mystery with which you have no concern. But impressions and reactions are to be

found in both these kingdoms, and upon such response depends the evolution of the
indwelling consciousness.
The animal kingdom has a peculiar relation to the fourth kingdom in nature, and the
unfolding of the animal consciousness proceeds along lines paralleling, yet dissimilar
to that of the human being who is beginning to respond to the kingdom of souls, the
fifth kingdom. It is the karma and destiny of the fourth kingdom to be the impressing
agent for the third; the problem is complicated, however, by the fact that the animal
kingdom antedates the human and had, therefore, generated a measure of karma -
both good and evil - prior to the appearance of mankind. The "impressing process"
carried forward by humanity is modified and often negated by two factors:
1. Human ignorance and selfishness, plus inability to work consciously and
intelligently with the embryonic minds within animal forms; this is true except
in a few (a very few) cases which involve the domestic animals. When
humanity is itself further advanced, its intelligent impression upon the
consciousness of the animal kingdom will produce planetary results. At
present this is not so. It will only come when the animal kingdom (as a result
of human understanding) becomes invocative.
2. The self-generated karma of the animal kingdom which is largely being
worked off in its relation to mankind today. The karmic entity - holding a type
of rule within the third kingdom - is a part of the planetary Dweller on the
Threshold. [80]
You will note, therefore, the amazing planetary sequence of impression - all of it
emanating from the highest possible sources, though stepped down and regulated to
the receiving factors; all of it concerned to a greater or less degree (according to the
quality of the mechanism of reception) with the will and purpose of Sanat Kumara;
all of it, during the aeons, achieving a group potency and a responding sensitivity.
The main factor preventing a completely unimpeded sequence of impression from
Shamballa straight down into the mineral kingdom, via all the other kingdoms, is the
factor of free will, resulting in karmic responsibility. This can be either good or bad.
It is interesting to note here that both the good and the bad karma produce
conditions which not only have to be worked out, but that they lead to conditions
which delay what we - from our limited point of view - might look upon as the
liberation of the planet. The generating of good karma necessitates the "living
through" of conditions where everything (for the man responsible or for any other
form within its limitations) is good, happy, beneficent and useful. The evil karma
generated in any kingdom in relation to the "realm where dwelleth the planetary
Dweller on the Threshold" stands between the cosmic Door of Initiation and our
planetary Logos. This Dweller represents all the mistakes and errors due to wrong
reactions, unrecognized contacts, deliberate choices made in defiance of known
good, and mass movements and mass activities which are temporarily not
progressive in time and space. I realize that where these facts apply to the
subhuman kingdoms in nature you are not aware of what I mean, but that does not
alter the law or movements which are in no way related to human evolution. In
connection with the planetary Logos I would like to add that in that great planetary
struggle and His subsequent [81] initiation, we are all implicated - from the atom of
substance up to and including all the Lives which form the Council Chamber of the
Lord of the World; it is this titanic effort which is made by the sumtotal of all the
living processes and entities that compose the manifestation of Sanat Kumara which
is responsible for the creative evolutionary processes; it is also responsible for what
we call time, with all that that concept involves of events, opportunity, the past, the
present and the future, the good and the evil.

The dynamic impression which emanates from Shamballa reaches forth in great
cycles and cyclic waves; these are impulsed from extra-planetary sources, as
demanded or invoked by the Lord of the World and His Associates; they emanate in
response to the "acclaimed will" of Sanat Kumara in the Council Chamber.
This high spiritual and ultimate impression moves outward along the seven rays,
viewing them as seven streams of spiritual energy, qualified and colored by the
Shamballic impression; this process repeats itself when hierarchical invocation is
effective and successfully established.
This again is repeated between the Hierarchy and Humanity in response to human
invocation; this is becoming increasingly intelligent, potent and evocative.
The problem of the human kingdom is, however, very great. Humanity is the
recipient of so many impacts, so many impressions, so many telepathic and mental
currents and so many qualified vibratory impressions from all the seven kingdoms in
nature that aeons have elapsed in developing the adequate discriminative sensitivity
and in establishing the certitude of the point in evolution from which conscious
invocation must arise and upon which the evoked impression must be registered.
Unconscious invocation proceeds all the time; when it becomes conscious, it
becomes exceedingly powerful. [82]
The entire human family is today an amazing receiver of impressions, owing to its
myriad types of susceptible mechanisms. These impressionable instruments are
capable of registering tamasic impressions, coming from the subhuman kingdoms,
particularly the third and the first; they record rajasic impressions coming from
mental sources of all kinds; they are also - to a much less degree - responsive to
sattvic or rhythmic impressions. Their response to these high impressions and their
registration of truth, light and quality, coming from the highest sources is, however,
growing.
It is because of this that the human kingdom (the great middle kingdom whose
function it is to mediate between the higher and the lower) is the subject of much
divine impression, conveying the Purpose of Sanat Kumara. This you know. I have
taught you much along this line in A Treatise on the Seven Rays and also in the
earlier Treatise on Cosmic Fire. In these present instructions I am dealing with group
possibilities, with groups which can be trained to record, register and be impressed
by the Hierarchy. Such a group can be in the position of being able to invoke the
Hierarchy with power if it so choose. I am again bringing these things to your
attention as aspirants and disciples, but from an angle different to those in my
earlier writings. The responsibility of impressionability, of telepathic registration and
of invocative appeal is very great; hence what I have written here. [83]

XII. Relation of the Human to the Hierarchical Center
True telepathic rapport is part of the Supreme Science of Contact and has peculiar
and definite reference to humanity. Many different terms might be used in the effort
to convey some understanding of this subtle, subjective mode of relationship, and I
have used among others the following:
1. The Science of Contact.
2. The Science of Impression.
3. The Science of Invocation and Evocation.
4. The Science of Relationship.
5. The Science of Sensitivity.
All these terms convey different aspects of the reaction of form or forms to contact,
to impression, to impact, to environment, to the thought context of various minds, to
ascending and descending energies, to the invocation of agents and the evocation of
their response. The whole planetary system is in reality a vast interlocking,
interdependent and interrelated complexity of vehicles communicating or responsive
to communication.
The moment that this interrelated and communicating system is studied from the
angle of relationships, then the processes of evolution and the goal of the spirit of
man (which is in reality the Spirit of the planetary Logos) become of vital and
supreme importance, but are at the same time most difficult to comprehend. So
immense is the theme that it is profitless for us to do more than deal with two
factors: [84]
1. The Science of Impression in relation to mankind.
2. The impressing Centers, as they affect the understanding of relationship.
The many modes of contact between the many subhuman and superhuman forms,
groupings, and kingdoms are too intricate in their nature to be grasped at this time
by students, and - which is more important - the information would be of small use
to them. We will, therefore, confine ourselves to the Science of Impression and the
Science of Invocation and Evocation only in so far as they affect humanity. These -
from the human angle - cover reception of impression and of ideas, and expressions
of the consequences of sensitivity at this time and in this particular cycle.
We are to consider, therefore, the relation of the human center to the hierarchical
center and the growing responsiveness of humanity to the "Center where the Will of
God is known". As I said before, it is not my intention to give here the rules
governing telepathic intercourse. Such intercourse is found between man and man
and groups and groups. The relationship is slowly and normally developed and
requires no hastening. It is developing as the other senses of man and his apparatus
of perception have developed. Humanity is, however, outstripping telepathic
development in the rapid responsiveness of entire groups, and of human beings en
masse, to group impression and to group impartation of ideas. The sudden response
of groups and nations to mass ideologies has been both unexpected and difficult to
handle wisely and constructively. It was not anticipated by either Shamballa or the
Hierarchy that mass impression would develop more quickly than that of individual
sensitivity, but it has happened that way. The individual within a group and working
within a group is far [85] more correctly sensitive than is the man struggling alone to
render himself sensitive to impression.

One of the factors militating against personal telepathic development lies in the fact
that the strong, potent and modern ascension of the spirit in man - as a whole -
frequently offsets personality reactions, and telepathy is a personality matter
depending upon contact between mind and mind. The moment, however, that man
tries to be telepathic, he is immediately swept into a vortex of abstract energies
which condition him for spiritual impression far more than they fit him for personal
relationships telepathically established.
This surprising development freed the supervising Masters for some of Their plans
and led Them to abandon the training of individual disciples in telepathic rapport and
to recognize the opportunity to train and develop invocative groups. Instead of
working in lower mental substance with picked aspirants, They changed the medium
of contact to that of the soul and launched the relatively new Science of Invocation
and Evocation. The lower mind then became simply an interpreter of impressions
with the emphasis upon the group mind, the group purpose and the group will. This
developing system of trained invocatives made the mind a positive acting factor and
tuned out all tendency to negativity.
This hierarchical decision then necessarily led to the instituting of the processes of
group initiation, thus shifting the area of training and the whole of the teaching
process and of preparation for initiation on to higher levels. The experiment of giving
mankind the Great Invocation was tried and is proving successful, though much yet
remains to be done.
It might be said, therefore, that the four requirements which are needed to aid the
disciple to meet the demands of [86] the initiatory process are "the ability to be
impressed, the capacity accurately to register the impression, the power to record
what has been given, and then to give it word forms in the mind consciousness." On
the basis of the information received, the disciple must then properly invoke the
needed energies and learn through experience to produce a responsive evocation.
My earlier statement on this subject a few pages back was intended to lead up to this
teaching and I repeat it here:
"The entire human family is today an amazing receiver of impressions,
owing to the myriad types of susceptible mechanisms... It is because
of this that the human kingdom (the great middle kingdom whose
function it is to mediate between the higher and the lower) is the
subject of so much divine impression, conveying the purpose of Sanat
Kumara... In these present instructions I am dealing with group
possibilities, with groups which can be trained to record, register and
be impressed by the Hierarchy. Such a group can be in the position of
being able to invoke the Hierarchy with power if it so choose. I am
again bringing these things to your attention as aspirants and
disciples, but from an angle different to those in my earlier writings.
The responsibility of impressionability, of telepathic registration and of
invocative appeal is very great."
For the aspirant and particularly for the conscious disciple, the impression to be
considered comes from four sources:
1. From the disciple's own soul.
2. From the Ashram with which he is to be affiliated.
3. Directly from the Master.
4. From the Spiritual Triad, via the antahkarana. [87]

The first two stages cover the period of the first two initiations; the third precedes
the third initiation and persists until the disciple is himself a Master; the fourth type
of informative impression can be registered after the third initiation and reach the
disciple in the Ashram; he then has the task himself of impressing his mind with
what he has been told and known within the Ashram; eventually, as a Master of an
Ashram, he starts upon one of the major hierarchical tasks of mastering the Science
of Impression. There are therefore, two aspects to this work of impression: one deals
with the capacity to be impressed; the other with the ability to be an impressing
agent. The disciple is not permitted to practice the art of impressing until he himself
is among those who receive Triadal impression and therefore impression from
Shamballa, within the protective area or aura of the Ashram with which he is
affiliated. It must be remembered that this Science of Impression is in reality the
science of thought-form-making, thought-form vitalization and thought-form
direction; and only a disciple who has passed through the processes of
Transfiguration and is no longer the victim of his own personality can be entrusted
with so dangerous a cycle of powers. As long as there exists any desire for selfish
power, for unspiritual control and for influence over the minds of other human beings
or over groups, the disciple cannot be trusted, under the hierarchical rules, with the
deliberate creation of thought-forms designed to produce specific effects, and with
their dispersal to men and groups. After he has passed the tests of the
Transfiguration Initiation he may do so.
The Science of Impression is the bedrock or the foundation for the practice of
telepathy. If a major world test were to be made, those receptive to impression
would be found to fall into two groups: [88]
1. Those possessing unconscious receptivity to telepathic impression. They at
present constitute a majority wherein the impression is received via the solar
plexus, and the thought-forms thus generated are dispatched from the throat
center of the one who is the impressing agent.
2. Those who are developing or have developed a conscious receptivity wherein
the impression is, first of all, received by the mind and then imparted to and
registered by the brain. The one who is the impressing agent in this case
works via the center between the eyebrows, the ajna center.
The first group of recipients are purely personality grounded or focused. In some
cases they are only physically aware of the life processes and of some contact which
remains for them unrecognized and unchecked or uncontrolled in any way. Under
this group we must, therefore, class all mediumistic phenomena, even those of the
highest astral or spiritual nature, plus the messages received from the usually
beautiful subconscious of the average person upon the Probationary Path. Messages
from the disciple's own soul are intermediate between those mediumistic expressions
and those which are definitely mental in nature.
With this last mentioned type of communication, there will be found mixed certain
messages or impressions from the Ashram which the disciple will be apt to confuse
with group telepathy, soul communication and direct relation with the Master - a
relationship at this stage non-existent. This will not greatly matter, because when
the disciple begins to realize certain differences, a new type of registration will
awaken and guide the disciple's consciousness.
This stage, which embraces the second type of impression in its earliest forms, can
be quite a long one, for it [89] covers a very definite period of transition from the
astral plane to the mental plane. The time equation varies according to ray and the
age of the soul. Sixth ray people, for instance, are very slow in making this

transition, owing to the pronounced factor of glamor; first and second ray people are
relatively quick. Third ray people are also slow, for they are lost in the threads of
their own glamorous manipulations and their devious thinking, and hardly know
where truth begins and delusion ends; illusion, which is the problem of the mental
types on all rays, is far more temporary in its effects than is delusion.
When the disciple has mastered to some degree the significant difference between
messages from his own subconscious or the subconscious of other people with whom
he may be en rapport, and the messages coming from his own soul, his life then
becomes more self-directed and organized, more fruitful from the angle of service,
and therefore of definite use to the Hierarchy. He learns to distinguish the messages
coming from his own soul from those which are hierarchical; his life becomes more
clearly directed; he next distinguishes definitely and accurately the communications
which come to him from the Ashram and which are sent out to make impression
upon the minds of aspirants and disciples of all degrees and of all ray types. When
he can distinguish between these various communications, then and only then does
the third type of communication become possible - direct messages which are due to
contact with the Master of his Ashram in person. He, by that time, possesses what
has been called "the freedom of the Ashram" and "the keys to the Kingdom of God";
he can then be trusted with some of the directive potency of the Ashram itself. His
thinking will then affect and reach others. This developing effectiveness grows with
rapidity when the fourth type of impression is familiar to the [90] disciple: that
coming from the Spiritual Triad, and therefore from the Monad and Shamballa. There
are consequently (to this final stage of impression) three lesser though definite
states, each marking an expansion in the realm of service and each related to the
last three initiations of the total possible nine initiations which confront developing
humanity. The sixth initiation, in which only Masters can participate, marks a
transition from the first three stages of impressibility required by the disciples as
preludes to the fifth initiation - or in reality to the third, fourth and fifth - and are
related to the three stages of Triadal communication, each of which is related to the
seventh, the eighth and the ninth initiations.
Never does the geometrical pattern, the numerical progression or the Law of
Correspondences break down in the understanding of the purpose and the plans of
the planetary Logos - established before the worlds were created and finding their
prototypes upon the cosmic mental planes. These points are peculiarly difficult for
men to grasp at this time wherein their state of consciousness is concentratedly
individualized.
Nevertheless, there is on man's part a steadily growing responsiveness to an
expanding environment, as for instance man's recognition of the distinction between
nationalism and internationalism. This responsiveness is naturally conditioned by
human free will, effective peculiarly in the timing process. He may learn rapidly and
fast or he may go the slow way, but his state of consciousness remains one of a
developing reaction to his environment, as registered by his consciousness, and in
which he (stage by stage) becomes an integral factor. This integration into his
environment, his absorption of its atmosphere and his potency in progression are all
related to the fact that he is created to receive impression and that he possesses a
mechanism of response to all [91] the facets of the divine expression in
manifestation. It is for that reason that the truly illumined man and all who have
taken the three highest initiations are always referred to as "the diamond soled";
they, in their totality constitute the "jewel in the lotus" - that twelve-petalled lotus
which is the symbol and expression of the potency of the planetary Logos.

You can see, therefore, how the theme of revelation runs throughout the entire
evolutionary process; it must never be forgotten that step by step, stage by stage,
expansion after expansion, initiation after initiation, the divine WHOLE is realized by
man. The method is impressed from a hitherto unrecognized environment; this only
becomes possible in this particular form when "the Sons of Mind who are the Sons of
God and whose nature is at-one with His began to move on Earth". The Science of
Impression is in reality the technique whereby Humanity has been taught by the
Spiritual Hierarchy from the moment of its first appearance upon Earth; it is the
technique which all disciples have to learn (no matter which of the Seven Paths they
may eventually choose) and it is also the sublime art which every Master practices
on inspiration from Shamballa; it is a technique which is implemented by the Will,
and its consummation is the complete assimilation of the "little wills of men" into the
divine Purpose; it is the acceptance on their part of the promotion of that Purpose
through right impression on all forms of life at any particular point of evolution.
Disciples then become agents of the divine will and are entrusted with the direction
of energies, with the plan and with the secrets and the inspiration which are hidden
in the Mind of God.
To that knowledge - germinated and formed in the solar system previous to this -
they add that which the present solar system has to give and to mature; the [92]
magnetic attractiveness of the second Ray of Love-Wisdom in one of its three major
forms or Rays of Aspect, implemented by the four Rays of Attribute. This power to
use the ray energies to attract and impress the constantly expanding revelation is
the clue to all the work going forward today, and to this activity we give the name of
the Science of Impression. It involves the constant opening up of a new environment
- an environment which reaches all the way from the lowest grade of daily living,
undertaken by the least developed of human beings, to that point upon the ladder of
evolution when the aspirant becomes consciously susceptible to what we call spiritual
impression. At that point he becomes capable of being more sensitive to a higher
range of impression and - at the same time - he himself begins to learn the art of
impressing the minds of others, to master the understanding of the level from which
he works as an impressing agent, and to know who are the sons of men he can
impress. He has to master also the secondary lesson of adapting his environment in
such a manner that he can impress others and the impression can find its way
through his environing circumstances and into the usually inattentive minds for
whom he feels a responsibility.
This he does through a growing knowledge of himself and through learning the art of
registering. The clearer and the more deeply apprehending is his capacity to register
the impression to which he is subjected and to which he is sensitive, the more easily
will he reach those he must aid towards a wider and deeper insight. This registering
of his own expanding environment - with all its implications of a new vision, a new
goal, a wider field of service - leads to the inflowing energies (arriving on the wings
of inspiration) becoming a reservoir of thought-substance, to the use of which he
must accustom himself. [93]
The first step then is the fact of recording and of reducing into correct and available
concepts, ideas and thought-forms, that which he has registered. This marks the first
stage in his truly occult service, and to this new type of service he will be
increasingly dedicated. From the reservoir of thought-substance he learns to project
those forms, those magnetic ideas, which will invoke the attention of those he seeks
to help; this is called the stage of resultant invocation. It is an invocative act, an
invocative way of living, which will find its way into the minds of men, and which will
call forth or evoke from them a response and a widening consciousness; the
processes of spiritual impression are thereby set up; it is also an invocation - on the

part of the disciple - for further and greater impression and inspiration in order to
increase his ability to serve. [94]

XIII. Telepathic Sensitivity - A Normal Unfoldment
You will have noticed that I have given no instructions as to the art of developing
telepathic sensitivity. The reason is, as I told you before, that this sensitivity should
be, and always is, a normal unfoldment when the disciple is correctly oriented,
completely dedicated and learning decentralization. If it is a forced process, then the
sensitivity developed is not normal and carries with it much difficulty and future
danger. Where the disciple is concerned, release from the constant consideration of
personal circumstances and problems leads inevitably to a clear mental release; this
then provides those areas of free mental perception which make the higher
sensitivity possible. Gradually, as the disciple acquires true freedom of thought and
the power to be receptive to the impression of the abstract mind, he creates for
himself a reservoir of thought which becomes available at need for the helping of
other people and for the necessities of his growing world service. Later, he becomes
sensitive to impression from the Hierarchy. This is at first purely ashramic, but is
later transformed into total hierarchical impression by the time the disciple is a
Master; the Plan is then the dynamic substance providing the content of the reservoir
of thought upon which he can draw. This is a statement of unique and unusual
importance. Later still, he becomes sensitive to impression from Shamballa, and the
quality of the Will which implements planetary Purpose is added to the content of his
available knowledge. The point which I seek to make here, however, is the fact of
the existence of a growing reservoir of thought which the disciple has created in
response to the many [95] varying impressions to which he is becoming increasingly
sensitive; the ideas, concepts and spiritual objectives of which he is becoming aware
are steadily being formulated by him into thoughts with their appropriated thought-
forms, and upon these he learns to draw as he seeks to serve his fellowmen. He
finds himself in possession of a reservoir or pool of thought-substance which is the
result of his own mental activity, of his innate receptivity, and which provides the
material for teaching and the "fount of knowledge" upon which he can draw when he
seeks to aid other people.
The essential point to be grasped is that sensitivity to impression is a normal and
natural unfoldment, paralleling spiritual development. I gave you a clue to the entire
process when I said that
"Sensitivity to impression involves the engendering of a magnetic aura
upon which the highest impressions can play"
I would have you give the deepest consideration to these words. As the disciple
begins to demonstrate soul quality, and the second divine aspect takes possession of
him and controls and colors his entire life, automatically the higher sensitivity is
developed; he becomes a magnet for spiritual ideas and concepts; he attracts into
his field of consciousness the outline, and later the details, of the hierarchical Plan;
he becomes aware eventually of the planetary Purpose; all these impressions are not
things which he must seek out and learn laboriously to ascertain, to hold and seize
upon. They drop into his field of consciousness because he has created a magnetic
aura which invokes them and brings them "into his mind". This magnetic aura begins
to form itself from the first moment he makes a contact with his soul; it deepens and
grows as those contacts increase in frequency and become eventually an habitual
state of [96] consciousness; then, at will and at all times, he is en rapport with his
soul, the second divine aspect.
It is this aura which is in reality the reservoir of thought-substance upon which he
can spiritually rely. His point of focus is upon the mental plane. He is no longer

controlled by the astral nature; he is successfully constructing the antahkarana along
which the higher impressions can flow; he learns not to dissipate this inflow but to
accumulate within the aura (with which he has surrounded himself) the knowledge
and the wisdom which he realizes his service to his fellowmen requires. A disciple is
a magnetic center of light and knowledge just in so far as the magnetic aura is held
by him in a state of receptivity. It is then constantly invocative of the higher range of
impressions; it can be evoked and set into "distributing activity" by that which is
lower and which is demanding aid. The disciple therefore, in due time, becomes a
tiny or minute correspondence of the Hierarchy - invocative as it is to Shamballa and
easily evoked by human demand. These are points warranting careful consideration.
They involve a primary recognition of points of tension and their consequent
expansion into magnetic auras or areas, capable of invocation and evocation.
These areas of sensitivity pass through three stages, upon which it is not my
intention to enlarge:
1. Sensitivity to impression from other human beings. This sensitivity becomes
of use in service when the needed magnetic aura has been engendered and is
brought under scientific control.
2. Sensitivity to group impression - the passage of ideas from group to group.
The disciple can become a receptive agent within any group of which he is a
part, and this ability indicates progress in his part. [97]
3. Sensitivity to hierarchical impressions, reaching the disciple via the
antahkarana and - later - from the Hierarchy as a whole, when he has
attained some of the higher initiations. This indicates ability to register
impression from Shamballa.
It would be of value if we now considered three points which are concerned with
sensitivity to impression, with the construction of the resultant reservoir of thought,
and with responsiveness to subsequent invocative appeals. These three points are:
1. Processes of Registration.
2. Processes of Recording Interpretations.
3. Processes of Resultant Invocative Response.
I would recall to your minds the knowledge that the aura which each of you has
created around the central nucleus of your incarnated self or soul is a fragment of
the over-shadowing soul which brought you into manifestation. This aura is (as you
well know) composed of the emanations of the etheric body, and this in its turn
embodies three types of energy for which you are individually responsible. These
three types are (when added to the energy of prana which composes the etheric
vehicles):
1. The health aura. This is essentially physical.
2. The astral aura, which is usually by far the most dominant factor, extensive
and controlling.
3. The mental aura, which is in most cases relatively small but which develops
rapidly once the disciple takes his own development consciously in hand, or
once the polarization of the personality is upon the mental plane. The time
will eventually come when [98] the mental aura will obliterate (if I may use
such an inadequate term) the emotional or astral aura, and then the soul
quality of love will create a substitute, so that the needed sensitivity does not
entirely disappear but is of a higher and far more acute nature.

In this threefold aura (or more correctly, fourfold, if you count the etheric vehicle)
every individual lives and moves and has his being; it is this living, vital aura which
is the recording agent of all impressions, both objective and subjective. It is this
"agent of sensitive response" which the indwelling self has to control and use in
order to register impression or to direct etheric or mental impression out into the
world of men. Astral impression is purely selfish and individual and, though it may
affect a man's surroundings, is not directed as are the other energies registered. It is
the aura which predominantly creates the effects which a person has upon his
associates; it is not primarily his words which produce reactions even though they
are supposed to embody his reactions and his thinking but which are, in reality,
usually expressions of his emotional desires.
All of us, therefore, carry around with us a subjective mechanism which is a true and
perfect picture of our peculiar point in evolution. It is the aura which a Master
watches, and this is a factor of major importance in the life of the disciple. The light
of the soul within the aura and the condition of the various aspects of the aura
indicate whether or not the disciple is nearing the Path of Discipleship. As the
emotional reactions lessen, and as the mental apparatus clarifies, the progress of the
aspirant can be exactly noted. I would have you distinguish carefully between the
astral and the mental bodies and that which they emanate. The bodies (so called)
are substantial in nature; the aura is essentially radiatory and extends from each
[99] substantial vehicle in every direction. This is a point which should be most
carefully noted.
The problem of the aspirant as he "engenders" his magnetic aura is himself to
withdraw, and thus lessen the extent and the power of the astral aura, and extend
and increase the potency of the mental aura. It should be remembered that the large
majority of aspirants are definitely polarized in the astral nature, and that therefore
their problem is to achieve a different polarization and to become focused upon the
mental plane. This takes time and vast effort. Eventually - as mentioned above - the
radiation of the soul is substituted in place of the hitherto present emotional activity
of the aspirant; this emanation is, in reality, a radiation from the love petals of the
egoic lotus.
The moment an aspirant begins to work consciously at his own unfoldment and to
consider and deal with the aura with which he is equipped, he then passes through
three stages during his progress upon the Path of Return. These are:
1. The stage wherein he discovers the potency and the quality of his astral aura.
Owing to the fact that this is (in this second solar system) the quality of love
and its distortion into the astral nature, the development of emotional
sensitivity is peculiarly and almost unnaturally strong. It is stronger than the
mental body and its mental direction.
2. The stage wherein the mental vehicle increases its potency and produces,
finally, a mental radiation which is so strong that it dominates and controls
the astral aura.
3. The stage wherein the soul expresses its essential nature of love and begins
to pour its radiation into the astral aura, via the astral body. Eventually the
[100] sensitivity of love is substituted for emotional sensitivity and desire.
Aspirants are to be found at all these three stages of sensitivity. There comes a
moment during the second initiation when the soul of the initiate sweeps into activity
and fundamental force (if I might use such a term) submerges the astral nature,
vitalizing and inspiring the astral body, changing temporarily the quality of the astral
aura, and establishing a control which will lead finally to the substitution which I

have mentioned above. This is an aspect of the truth which underlies the doctrine of
"vicarious at-one-ment" - a doctrine which has been woefully distorted by Christian
theology.
Let us now deal with the aforementioned "Processes of Registration, of Recording
Interpretations, and the Resultant Invocative Response." We must bear in mind
always that I am stating general rules and that I am not dealing either with the ideal
or with the undesirable; the sources of impression change as the disciple makes
progress, though always the larger and the greater source will include all lesser
sources.
The fact that a man is sensitive to hierarchical impression in his mental aura will not
prevent his being sensitive in his astral nature to the invocative and emotional call of
human beings. The two together are most useful in effect, if the disciple sees to it
that they are related. Forget this not, brother of mine. The capacity to interpret
recorded impressions is likewise learnt as the mental aura develops under the
influence of the "mind held steady in the light" of the soul; the disciple learns that all
recorded truth is susceptible to many interpretations, and that these unfold with
increasing clarity as he takes one initiation after another, and as he develops
conscious responsiveness. The ability to invoke demonstrates from life to life and
involves [101] the invocation of conscious response from the anima mundi or from
the subconscious soul of all things, as well as from the human consciousness and
from the world of superconscious contact.
This ability develops steadily as the aspirant treads the Path of Discipleship; it is
frequently prefaced in the earlier stages by much confusion, much astral psychism
and frequent wrong interpretations. There is no need at this stage, however, for
undue distress, because all that is needed is experience, and that experience is
gained through experiment and its expression in the daily life. In no case is the
truism of learning through a system of trial and error proved more correct than it is
in the life and experience of the accepting disciple. When he is an accepted disciple,
the errors decrease in number even though the trials (or the experimental use of the
many varying energies) become more extensive and, therefore, cover a much wider
range of activities.
The Processes of Registration are founded upon what I might call invocative
approaches from a wide area of possible contacts. The disciple has to learn to
distinguish between these many impacts upon his sensitive aura. In the early stages
the majority of them are unconsciously registered, though the registration is acute
and accurate; the goal, nevertheless, is conscious registration; this is brought about
through the constant and steady holding of the attitude of the Observer. It is
developed through the attainment of detachment - the detachment of the Observer
from all desires and longings which concern the separated self. It will therefore be
obvious to you that the use of the word "observer" involves the concept of duality
and, therefore, of separation. In this case, however, the motive prompting
observation is not self-interest, but the determination to clarify the aura so that it
can register only [102] that which will be illuminating and related to the divine Plan,
which will be to the benefit of humanity and, therefore, to the creation of a new
server within the Ashrams of the Hierarchy.
The divisions made by certain psychologists of the consciousness of man into
subconscious, conscious or self-conscious, and superconscious have a real measure
of value here. It must be remembered, however, that the disciple, first of all,
becomes a truly conscious unit of humanity and thus develops a true self-
consciousness. This he arrives at by discriminating between the lower self and the
higher self, and this renders his magnetic aura sensitive to an aspect of himself

which has not hitherto been a controlling factor. From that achieved point he begins
to register impressions with increasing clarity and accuracy. Usually, in the early
stages, the one desire of the disciple is to register impressions from the Hierarchy;
he much prefers that idea to the idea of registering impressions from his own soul or
from the surrounding human factors, his fellowmen and the environment and the
circumstances which they create. He longs for what might be called "vertical
impression." This motive, being very largely self-centeredness, turns the disciple
introspectively in upon himself, and it is in this stage that many aspirants become
prisoners, astrally speaking, because they register in their magnetic aura the many
astrally motivated thought-forms of what they believe and hope "vertical impression"
supposedly would convey. They contact with facility the astral counterparts of the
higher worlds, which are reflected (and thereby distorted) into the astral plane; the
world there registered is glamored by wrong and selfish desires and by the wishful
thinking of well-meaning devotees. Upon this I need not enlarge. All disciples at
some point or another of their training - have to work through this phase of glamor;
in so doing they [103] clarify and intensify the magnetic aura and, simultaneously,
clarify the surrounding astral world with which they are in contact. They learn also
that the longing to register impressions from the Hierarchy must give place to the
determination to place their magnetic aura at the disposal of humanity; they then
learn to register human need and to understand thereby where help is possible and
their fellowmen can be served. By means of this conscious registration of invocative
appeals from the world of horizontal contacts, the magnetic aura of the disciple is
cleared of the hindering and engrossing thought-forms, and from the aspirational
desires and longings which have hitherto prevented right registration. The disciple
then ceases to create them, and those which have been created die out or atrophy
for lack of attention.
Later on, when the accepting disciple becomes the accepted disciple and is permitted
to participate in ashramic activity, he adds the ability to register hierarchical
impression; this however is only possible after he has learnt to register impression
coming to him from his own soul (the vertical impression) and from the surrounding
world of men (the horizontal impression). When he has taken certain important
initiations, his magnetic aura will be capable of registering impression from the
subhuman kingdoms in nature. Again, later on, when he is a Master of the Wisdom
and, therefore, a full member of the fifth kingdom in nature, the world of hierarchical
life and activity will be the world from which horizontal impression will be made upon
his magnetic aura, and vertical impression will come from the higher levels of the
Spiritual Triad and, still later, from Shamballa. Then the world of humanity will be to
him what the subhuman kingdoms were when the fourth kingdom, the human, was
the field of his registered horizontal impression. [104] You have here the true
significance of the Cross of humanity clearly revealed.
The fact of registration is no unusual phenomenon. Sensitive people are constantly
being impressed from some level of consciousness or other, and are receptive to
these impressions according to the level of consciousness upon which they normally
function; mediums, for instance, are exceedingly prone to receive impressions from
etheric or astral levels, as are the vast majority of astral psychics - and their name is
legion. Impressions from mental levels (concrete, abstract or of a more exalted
nature) make their impress upon the minds of those who have attained a true
measure of focus upon the mental plane. Scientists, mystics, mathematicians, occult
students, aspirants and disciples, educators and humanitarians and all who love their
fellowmen are all susceptible to such impression, and one of the outstanding needs
of the disciple is to develop adequate sensitivity to ashramic impression and contact.
Then he moves out of the group of mental sensitives listed above.

The problem with which I now deal is far deeper and concerns the interpretation and
the clear and correct recording of the impression, which is a far more difficult matter.
The subject who is impressed must know the source of the impression; he must be
able to relate it to some field of demanded information, correction, instruction, or
energy distribution. He must be able to state clearly on what aspect of his recording
mechanism (the mind, the astral body, the energy body, or the brain) the imparted
and registered impression has made impact. One of the difficulties, for instance,
facing the aspiring disciple and the earnest occult student is to record directly in the
brain impressions from the Spiritual Triad (and later from the Monad), via the
antahkarana. [105]
This impression must be a direct descent from mental levels to the brain, avoiding all
contact with the astral body; only in so far as this direct descent is attained will the
recorded impression be devoid of error. It will not then be tinctured with any
emotional complex whatsoever, for it is the astral level of consciousness which is the
great distorter of essential truth. Impressions from the Ashram or from the Spiritual
Triad (which are the only type of impressions with which I am here concerned) pass
through three stages:
1. The stage of mental recording. The clarity and the accuracy of this recording
will be dependent upon the condition of the channel of reception, the
antahkarana; in this recording, curiously enough, a certain element of time
enters in. It is not time as you know it upon the physical plane, which is but
the registration by the brain of passing "events"; it is the higher mental
correspondence to time. Into this, I cannot here enter as the theme is too
abstruse; for time, in this connection, is related to distance, to descent, to
focus, and to the power to record.
2. The stage of brain reception. The accuracy of this reception will be dependent
upon the quality of the physical brain cells, upon the polarization of the
thinking man in the head center, and the freedom of the brain cells from all
emotional impression. The difficulty lies here, that the receiving aspirant or
the focused thinker is always aware emotionally of the descent of the higher
impression and of the consequent clarification of the theme of his thought.
This must, however, be recorded by a perfectly quiescent astral vehicle, and
therefore you will see one of the main objectives of true meditation. [106]
3. The stage of recognized interpretation. This is an exceedingly difficult phase.
Interpretation is dependent upon many factors: the educational background,
the point reached in evolution, the mystical or the occult approach of the
disciple to the center of truth, his freedom from the lower psychism, his
essential humility (which plays a major part in proper understanding), and his
personality decentralization. In fact, the character in its entirety is involved in
this important matter of correct interpretation.
In this aspect of impression the subject of SYMBOLS must necessarily be involved.
All impressions must necessarily be translated and interpreted in symbols, in word
forms or in pictorial representations; these the aspirant cannot avoid; and it is in the
word forms (which are, needless to point out, in the nature of symbols) that he is apt
to go astray. They are the media through which the registered impression is
conveyed to the brain consciousness, i.e., to the physical plane awareness of the
disciple, thus making possible his useful comprehension of abstract ideas or of those
aspects of the Path which it is his duty to understand and teach.
There is no need for me to elaborate this theme. The true disciple is ever aware of
the possibility of error, of the intervention of psychic intrusions and distortions; he

knows well that true and effective interpretation of the imparted impression is
dependent largely upon the purity of the receiving channel and upon the freedom of
his nature from all aspects of the lower psychism - a point oft forgotten. A thick veil
of concrete thought-forms can also distort the true interpretation, as can astral
intervention; the teaching upon the Path and the spiritual impression can be
interfered with by glamor from the astral plane or by separate and [107] concrete
ideas emanating from mental levels. In this case it can be truly said that "the mind is
the slayer of the real." There is a deep occult significance to the words "an open
mind"; it is as essential to correct interpretation as is freedom from glamor and the
psychic expressions to be found upon the astral plane.
Here again you can grasp the necessity of a factual alignment so that a direct
channel is created, along which the impression (directed by some higher source than
the personality) can descend into the brain. At first, this channel and alignment must
be established between the brain and the soul; this will involve all the three aspects
of the personality - the etheric body, the astral vehicle and the mind nature;
basically, this aligning process should be started and developed upon the
Probationary Path and brought to a relatively high state of effectiveness upon the
earlier stages of the Path of Discipleship. Later, as the disciple consciously creates
the antahkarana and becomes a functioning part of the Ashram, he learns (whilst
practicing alignment) to by-pass - if I may use such a word - two aspects of himself
which have hitherto been of major importance: the astral vehicle and the soul body
or causal body. The astral body is thus by-passed before the fourth initiation, and
the soul body before the fifth; the entire process of "by-passing" takes much time
and must be worked at with intensity, first of all with the focus upon the emotional
nature through conscious discrimination, and finally upon the soul nature under the
inspiration of the Spiritual Triad which is eventually substituted for the soul. All this
will take many incarnations. For the registration and the interpretation of the higher
impressions is a basic occult science and takes much learning and application to
perfect.
As the two processes are slowly developed, the third stage automatically becomes
increasingly effective. The [108] received and interpreted impression brings about
fundamental changes in the life and the state of consciousness of the aspirant and,
above all, in his orientation. He becomes an evocative and invocative center of
energy. That which he has received through the medium of his aligning channel
becomes a potent factor in invoking a fresh flood of higher impression; it also makes
him evocative upon the physical plane, so that the magnetic aura which he has
engendered becomes increasingly sensitive to these spiritual inflowing impressions,
and also increasingly sensitive to that which he evokes from his surrounding physical
environment and from humanity. He becomes a power station en rapport with the
Hierarchy and he receives and distributes (in response to the evocative call of
humanity and human need) the energy received. He also becomes a "receiver of
light" and of spiritual illumination, and a distributor of light in the dark places of the
world and into human hearts. He is, therefore, an invocative and evocative center for
use by the Hierarchy in the three worlds of human evolution. [109]

XIV. Higher Aspects of Relationship
The word telepathy has been used primarily to cover the many phases of mental
contact and the exchange of thought without the use of the spoken or written word
or sign. However, what is thus understood in this modern usage does not cover the
higher aspects of "relationship within the Universal Mind." The third aspect, that of
intelligence, is involved when interpretation of contact occurs; the second aspect,
that of love-wisdom, is the factor which makes the higher impression possible, and
this it does whilst that aspect is developing or in process of coming into functioning
activity. During this developing process, only straight telepathy is possible and this is
of two kinds:
1. Sympathetic telepathy or immediate understanding, awareness of events,
apprehensions of happenings, and identification with personality reactions.
This is all connected with the solar plexus activity of the personality and this -
when the love nature or second aspect is unfolded or unfolding - becomes the
"seed or germ" of the intuitive faculty. The entire process is, therefore, astral-
buddhic and involves the lower aspects of the Universal Mind as an agent.
2. Mental telepathy or the interplay of transmitted thought. Though this is a
constant phenomenon among advanced intellectual people, it is still scarcely
recognized, its laws and modes of expression are as yet unknown, and the
best minds and interpreters on subjective levels still confuse it with solar
plexus reactions. It is a relatively new and unexplored [110] science, but the
range of its activities is not astral and, therefore, related to the solar plexus
center, for the substance in which this science is carried forward is not astral
substance but mental substance, and therefore another vehicle is involved
and employed, that of the mental body. It is the "seed or germ" of higher
contacts and of impressions coming from levels higher than the buddhic or
intuitional plane. It is related to the higher aspect of the Universal Mind, to
the intelligent Will. In both cases, the lower aspect of love (emotional and
sensitive astral response) and the pure love of the soul are involved.
Astral, sympathetic sensitivity is fallible and frequently erroneous in its conjectures
and interpretations. The higher telepathy - also a form of sensitivity, and which is as
an entering door or concept - becomes eventually infallible; in its earlier stages
(where methods of interpretation and of deduction are concerned) it may prove
frequently at fault.
Straight mental telepathy is one of the highest demonstrations of the personality; it
is in the nature of a bridging faculty, for it is one of the major steps towards the
higher impression; it always presupposes a relatively high stage of mental
development, and that is one reason why it is not yet regarded as a reputable,
proved and provable capacity of the human being. In this case, the mind is truly "the
slayer of the Real," and the sources and modes of subjective knowledge still remain
in a dark area of the human consciousness. The normal processes of evolution will,
however, prove incontrovertibly the existence of faculties which make the higher
spiritual and subjective impressions possible, and eventually normal.

This "Supreme Science of Contact" can be - as already explained - broken up into the
following phases which are [111] all progressively developed from each other. Forget
not the inevitable continuity which is the outstanding characteristic of the
evolutionary process.

1. Astral sensitive awareness. This is based upon the reactions of the solar
plexus, and the entire process is carried forward upon the astral plane and
with astral substance. This, in its highest form, becomes the factor which later
makes intuitive awareness and intuitive sensitivity possible; then the process
is carried forward in buddhic substance. Aspirants are, at one stage of their
development, strongly astral-buddhic in nature. This should be remembered.
2. Mental telepathy. This involves naturally two minds or several minds, and the
process is carried forward in the substance of the mental plane. It is the
factor which makes possible the activity which we call "impression." This
impression comes largely from certain aspects of the mental plane, such as:
a. The soul of the telepathic individual, using the knowledge petals of the
egoic lotus - a high form of mental intelligence.
b. The abstract mind, so called. This aspect of mental substance is largely
used by the Hierarchy in order to reach the minds of disciples. It is
only within the last few centuries that the Hierarchy has shifted the
focus of its living attention on to the buddhic plane and away from the
mental plane. This has become possible because the aspirants of the
world are now sensitive to contacts which are founded upon an astral-
buddhic consciousness but which are strictly carried on within mental
[112] substance. This necessarily involves the three aspects of the
mind, found therein: the concrete mind, the Son of Mind, and the
abstract sensitivity or reaction. This involves (on the physical plane)
an activity of the pituitary body (as you can readily see) and also the
use of the ajna center.
3. The occult Science of Impression. This becomes possible when the other two
forms of telepathic rapport are present and are developing to a certain point
of accuracy. It is dependent also upon the construction of the antahkarana
and upon the steady orientation of the aspirant or disciple toward the
Spiritual Triad; it also becomes possible when the abstract mind is developed
and sensitive, and can thus become the seed or germ of the spiritual Will; this
will involve responsiveness to divine purpose. The higher aspect of this
abstract mind is the atmic plane. It is useful to realize the substantial nature
of these two levels of consciousness. It is within the substance of the atmic
plane that the activity is set up which can impress the abstract mind, which
then becomes the seat of the consciousness of the spiritual man; at the same
time, he remains in active possession and use of his personality and continues
to employ the concrete mind; astral sensitivity, however, then begins to fall
below the threshold of consciousness and thus joins the great array of
instincts and of instinctual reactions of which the human being is possessed
and which admit him into the life and conditioned awareness of all that exists
in the three worlds, including the three subhuman kingdoms of nature. It is
with these sublimated and [113] controlled instincts that those Masters and
disciples work whose task it is to oversee the evolution of the forms of life in
the subhuman kingdoms.

The higher forms of mental telepathy, involving the soul and the abstract
mind are concerned solely with the divine Plan - as the Hierarchy works it out
in the three worlds. The Science of Impression is concerned, therefore,
primarily, with the divine Purpose as Shamballa is working it out, and also
with those higher aspects of hierarchical work which are not concerned with
work in the three worlds. This is a point upon which I would ask you to

ponder.

Today, owing to the curious evolutionary stage reached in the human
kingdom, an intermediate aspect of the three above forms of impression has
been instituted; it is like an interim period between full human expression and
the full expression of the kingdom of souls. This we call:
4. The Science of Invocation and Evocation. This science can and does use the
unintelligent urges and the higher (yet inchoate) longings of the masses of
men in an invocative form; it does so in order to bridge the gap existing in
consciousness between the life of the ordinary man, the life of the integrated
personality and the life of the soul. Through the use of this invocative demand
- oft speechless and not consciously expressed - the disciples of the world can
focus; they can employ it and thus generate an energy which will be strong
enough to make a true impact and a definite impression upon Beings and
Lives found on levels higher than those in the three worlds. This impact
evokes a reaction from these higher Beings, and then a spiritual and
intelligent interplay is set up which is of great value in [114] promoting an
added stimulus and an increased vitalization of the normal and usually slow
evolutionary process. This is happening today in an acute form and accounts
for much that is taking place in the world of human affairs at this time. The
spreading stimulation is of a very intense nature. The invocative cry of
humanity is not only the voiceless appeal which the hierarchical workers are
everywhere mobilizing, but it finds expression also in all the plans and
schemes, the formulated platforms, and the many groups and organizations
which are dedicated to the betterment of human living.
Certain basic concepts underlie every phase of the Science of Contact, and without
them there would be no basis for any effort to master this science. Please grasp this
fact. There are three which must always be borne in mind:
1. The medium through which the thought currents or impressions (from no matter
what source) must pass in order to make an impact upon the human brain is the
planetary etheric body. This is fundamental in its implications. This etheric vehicle
makes all relationships possible, because the individual etheric body is an integral
part of the vital body of the planet. This vital body is the medium also of all
instinctual reactions, such as an animal will evidence when danger is around. The
closer that this etheric body is interwoven (if I may use such a word) with the dense
physical vehicle, the clearer will be the instinctual reaction - as in the illustration
which I have given and which is based upon millennia of such reactions; the greater
also will be the sensitivity and the more aptitude will there be for [115] telepathic
contact and recognition of the higher impressions. It might also be added that the
etheric body of a disciple or even of an advanced person can be so handled and dealt
with that it can reject much that might otherwise impinge upon it, pass through it or
use it as a channel. This training is automatic; evidence of it can also be seen in the
ability which the human mechanism possesses to tune out all contacts and
impressions that it may not need, to which it is so accustomed that they do not even
register, and all that it deems undesirable or not fit for consideration. The reason
that true telepathic contact between minds is not more prevalent is due to the fact
that few people think with an adequate clarity or with the energy required; they do
not create true, concise or powerful thought-forms or - if they do - these thought-
forms are not correctly directed towards the intended objective. When a man is a
disciple and deliberately seeks to be impressed by his soul, by the Master or by the
Spiritual Triad, the task of the impressing agent is relatively simple; all the disciple
has to do is to develop right receptivity, plus an intuitive intelligence which will

enable him to make correct interpretations, and to recognize also the source of the
communication or impression.
This brings us to the second basic concept:
2. Sensitivity to impression involves the engendering of a magnetic aura upon which
the highest impressions can play. This I dealt with (in some measure) in the
preceding section. It should be borne in mind that the potency of the magnetic aura
which envelops all human beings is to be found at present in four [116] areas of
substance; these four areas are close to four major centers. When the individual is
strictly low grade and is predominantly animal in nature, then the majority of
impacting impressions will reach him automatically through the sacral center; such
impacting impressions (as you can well imagine) will be heavy and yet dynamic;
they will have reference to all that concerns his physical being, his physical
appetites, and his physical comfort or discomfort. There are however, today,
relatively few persons in proportion to the planetary population who use the sacral
center as the major registering organ. The magnetic aura (when this is the case) is
relatively small; all the tendencies of this tiny aura are downward in nature, and all
impressions (which cannot possibly come from a higher source than the man
himself) work down through the aura of the sacral center. Most of the impressions
are therefore purely instinctual in nature and little or no thought is involved; there is
evidence, however, of what can be understood as aspiration even if it is not what a
true aspirant might regard as spiritual in nature.
The average, though still unthinking, human being works through his astral body
and, because he is there polarized, works through his solar plexus center -
etherically and primarily. All impressions find entrance into the aura via the area
around that part of the etheric vehicle. It is through this major center that the
ordinary medium works, receiving impressions and communications from astral
entities or from the animated astral forms to be found in the glamors created by
humanity.
Forget not, nevertheless, that true aspiration is essentially an astral product or
reaction; all [117] aspirants - in the early stages of their slow reorientation - work
through the solar plexus center, and thus only gradually focus the lower energies
there, prior to their transmutation and elevation to the higher center, the heart
center. There are certain disciples who work deliberately upon the astral plane,
under instruction from the Master of their Ashram, in order to reach such neophytes
and thus to impress them with the knowledge and the subtle information needed for
their progress. No Master works in this manner, and the Masters have therefore to
use certain of Their disciples in this service. Such disciples direct the desired
impression to the solar plexus area of the magnetic aura. This magnetic aura has
another point of entry in the region of the throat center, utilizing it as the recipient of
higher impressions. This center or area of energy is largely used and vitally activated
by those who are the creative workers of the world; they have necessarily made a
direct contact with the soul and are therefore wide open to those intuitive ideas
which are the source of their creative work. According to the success they have in
such creative production, and according to the beauty of their work, will be the
impression they thereby convey to other men. Curiously enough, the new and
peculiar forms of art which delight some people and which outrage the sense of
beauty in others are largely solar plexus creations and are therefore not of a truly
high order. In a few of them - a very few - the throat center is involved.
The magnetic aura around the head is that which is truly sensitive to the highest
impressions and is the point of entry to the head center. Upon this I need not
enlarge; all that I have taught you is [118] related to the awakening of this highest

center, prior to the aspirant's becoming a member of the Kingdom of God. The ajna
center is not involved and it will remain for several more centuries the agent of
directed impression and not the objective of such impressions.
The next key-thought which is of importance is found in the words:
3. "The Plan is the dynamic substance, providing the content of the reservoir upon
which the impressing agent can draw and to which the recipient of the impression
must become sensitive."
This sentence requires probably a quite serious readjustment in the thinking of most
students. The concept of the Plan as Substance will assuredly be new to them, and
new perhaps also to you. It is nevertheless a concept which they must endeavor to
grasp. Let me phrase it somewhat differently: The Plan constitutes or is composed of
the substance in which the Members of the Hierarchy consistently work. Let us take
this important concept and break it up into its component parts for the sake of
clarity. I am strongly emphasizing these words because this concept is of an
importance almost beyond human comprehension, and because its understanding
may revise and revitalize your entire approach to the Plan, and you will therefore be
enabled to work in a fresh and in an entirely new manner:
1. The Plan IS substance. It is essentially substantial energy. And energy is
substance and nothing else.
2. The substance (which is the Plan) is dynamic in nature, and is therefore
impregnated with the energy of WILL. [119]
3. The Plan constitutes a reservoir of energized substance, held in solution by
the WILL of Sanat Kumara and embodying His intangible purpose (intangible
to us but not intangible to Him).
4. It is this planetary Substance upon which the "impressing agents" must draw
- the Nirmanakayas, the Members of the Hierarchy and the working disciples
of the world, plus all spiritual sensitives of a certain degree.
5. Recipients of the desired impression must become sensitive to this substantial
energy.
This entire proposition can be referred back to the originating Thinker Who brought
our manifested world into being, and Who sequentially and under the Law of
Evolution is bringing to fruition the objective of His thinking. In the larger and wider
sense, it is that sumtotal of the ocean of energies in which "we live and move and
have our being." This is the sevenfold body of the planetary Logos.
We are not here, however, considering the larger Whole, but we are dealing with a
specific and focused area of the planetary consciousness. This is found midway
between the highest plane whereon the Council Chamber of the Great Lord is found
and the three planes which form the active arena for hierarchical work - the three
levels of consciousness of the Spiritual Triad. This "focused area" has been
precipitated by the Agents of the divine Will; They know the ultimate purpose of
Sanat Kumara and hold it steadfastly in view, making it available to those Masters of
the Wisdom Who can act as the "impressing Agents of Sanat Kumara's Will." These
are the Manu, the Christ, and the Mahachohan, the Lord of Civilization.
It might be said here that the three Buddhas of Activity are the prime impressing
Agents and that the three Great [120] Lords are the "impressed Recipients" at an
exceedingly high level; this is the atmic level of awareness, which is the area
energized by the divine Will.

When dealing with the fifth Point of Revelation (Discipleship in the New Age, Vol. II.)
I said that it concerned itself with the highest aspect of the Will - with that which
produces the highest synthesis, the final synthesis. The planetary Purpose is the
eventual synthesis of the initial thought of the planetary Logos, and to this thought
we give always the unmeaning name of "GLORY"; this stands for all that we can
conceive of the divine purpose; it is, for us, a "blaze of glory." The human mind is at
this stage (in time and space) unable to register any aspect of the Purpose; all that
we can do is to cooperate with the efforts of the Hierarchy to activate those things
and events which will make the manifestation of the Purpose eventually possible.
This purpose will constitute the ultimate revelation to the final root-race of men; it
therefore lies a very long way ahead of our present point in evolution.
I will here make a statement which will probably convey nothing to the intelligence of
the average disciple, but which may constitute a fruitful seed thought to the initiate
who may read these words:
The Purpose of Sanat Kumara is created at present by the synthesis
which the nature of the final seven Paths reveals. It is adapted in time
and space to human intelligence by the presented Plan, and - in the
glory of consummation - the completed Plan will reveal the Purpose on
all the seven planes of evolution. Then evolution, as formulated and
imposed by the Hierarchy, will end and a greater dynamic expansion
will take its place.
You will note that all along the lines of teaching there comes an eventual merging
and blending, and that, at a [121] certain point in the development of consciousness,
the many lines of spiritual approach become the few lines of conscious spiritual
awareness. So it is in relation to the detail of the evolutionary process, with the
formulation of the hierarchical Plan, and with the recognition of the Purpose.
Speaking practically (and that is always of major importance), it might be said that
evolution controls the form of the Purpose; the Plan concerns the hierarchical
recognition of the Purpose, whilst the Purpose is the synthetic Thought which pours
into the supernal consciousness of the Lord of the World along the seven Paths of
which the Masters become aware at a certain very high initiation.
The seven great energies flow into our manifested world along the lines of the seven
Paths; these are not the direct energies of the seven Rays, because these concern
consciousness in a most specific manner; they are the substantial energies of
material expression and their origin concerns a great mystery. These two lines of
energy - material energy and the energy of consciousness - when brought together
by divine purpose, constitute the essential dualism of our manifested life.
All that we are able to recognize of that Purpose is the hierarchical Plan, and this
only disciples and advanced aspirants can judge and recognize. This Plan is based
upon knowledge of divine guidance in the Past, the recognition of progress out of
that Past into the Present, plus the effort to become sensitive to the right emergence
of that Plan (embodying ever an aspect of the Purpose) in the immediate Future. The
Purpose is related to the Past, the Present and the Future; the Agents of the Plan are
impressed from Shamballa, via the Nirmanakayas; the process is then repeated, and
advanced humanity become the recipients, the sensitive recipients, of the Plan as
transmitted to them by the impressing Agents, the Masters, working through the
[122] New Group of World Servers. This group is the lower correspondence of the
Nirmanakayas, the recipients of impression from Shamballa. See you, therefore, the
beauty and the synthesis, the interdependence and the cooperative interplay which
is demonstrated right through the chain of Hierarchy from the very highest Agent to
the very lowest recipient of divine impression.

The key to all this is energy. Energy is substance, and this substance is qualified by
divine dynamic WILL. There is much to be learnt anent the Will. Will as dynamic
energy is not yet understood in its true sense by human beings. Mankind usually
recognizes will as fixed determination; this is in reality their individual effort to
impress substance (personal or environing) with their own self-will or with their well-
intended effort to conform to what they believe to be the will of God, speaking
symbolically. But men know nothing yet of the process of working with dynamic
energized substance, for it basically impresses them and uses them as they become
aware of the Plan and thus come under the influence of the Spiritual Triad. They are
used and not using that which is available for the furtherance of the Plan - the
dynamic energy of the divine Will. This dynamic Will cannot become available nor
can disciples truly work with the Plan until the antahkarana is to some measure
adequately constructed, though not yet perfected.
It becomes of service, therefore, for the aspirant and the disciple to know the nature
of the Agents Who can locate their magnetic aura and impress upon it Their
understanding of the Plan; these Agents may be accepted disciples or initiates and
Masters; then the aspirant or disciple must find those to whom he can personally act
as an impressing agent. He has consequently to study himself as a recipient and also
as an agent, as a responsive factor and also as an [123] originating and impressing
factor. This might be regarded as the scientific approach to the spiritual life, and it is
of value because the necessity of service is implicit in the necessity for receptivity;
all is, therefore, related to Invocation and Evocation.
It is in our next basic theme, the nature of the etheric body, that we shall find again
the higher relationships and the interdependence of many allied factors. This
interdependence emerges acutely the higher one progresses into the scheme of
correspondences. Eventually, a point of fusion is reached. [124]

XV. Inter-Planetary and Extra-Planetary Relationships
The subject of the etheric body of all forms and of the etheric body of the planetary
Logos is necessarily of major importance in any consideration of the Supreme
Science of Contact. It is this concept of sensitive contact which I seek to emphasize
as we study the three points or the three basic concepts outlined in the preceding
section. All such terms as planes, groups, creative Hierarchies, and centers are
simply word modes of inferring relationship, interplay and mutual impression
between the beings or the lives who make up the sumtotal of our manifested
universe; they are nevertheless signs of our leading up to a planetary synthesis or a
planetary integrity of a nature hitherto not even visioned by man.
The subject is necessarily one of immense difficulty, for all human beings think in
terms of their own contacts and relationships, which are strictly limited and are not
expressed in terms of the One Life, flowing through all forms and all kingdoms, or
through all the diverse planetary evolutions (of which you know nothing) and thus
creating in time and space a living intelligent planetary Entity of systemic maturity,
qualified by immense attractive and integrating energies, motivated by a supreme
Purpose - a Purpose which is part of the vast purpose of the solar Logos, working
through the planetary Logoi, and therefore responsible for the well-being and
progressive evolution of all lives and groups of lives within the framework and the
essential structure of our planet.
The relation evoked is, as you can well imagine, interplanetary and extra-planetary;
these terms mean little to [125] the average disciple and he has to wait until the
initiatory process puts him in a position where he can frankly evaluate the situation.
Of the latter stages, we can know nothing; only in the Council Chamber of Shamballa
are these extra-planetary contacts and relationships recognizable. But one basic fact
must be grasped, and that is that the medium of relationship and of contact is
SUBSTANCE; and the effect of these relationships, carried on through this medium,
is the gradual development and progressive unfoldment of the three divine Aspects
which all esotericists recognize, and of others which the coming millennia will reveal.
The contributing factor, therefore, within and upon our planet is what we might
regard as the three major centers of the planetary Logos:
1. The Head Center, the dynamic Agent of the extra-planetary Purpose, the
expression of the divine planetary Will as focused in Shamballa. This is the
energy of Synthesis, the source of all planetary life; it connotes essential
Being.
2. The Heart Center, the Agent of the Plan of evolution. This is the expression of
divine Love or pure Reason, the Hierarchy. It is essentially the energy of
Attraction, the kingdom of souls.
3. The Throat Center, the Agent of all the three Aspects in relation to the three
subhuman kingdoms in nature, the expression also of the divine Intelligence,
Humanity. This is the energy of active Mind and makes humanity the
macrocosm of the microcosm, the three subhuman kingdoms. Humanity is to
these kingdoms what the Hierarchy is to the fourth kingdom in nature, the
human kingdom.
These are the elements of the occult science and - for students such as you - contain
nothing new. Nevertheless, they [126] need to be seen in their triple relationship if
the mode of working of the One Life is to be grasped more clearly than is now the
case. The aim of the entire evolutionary scheme is to bring these three Centers into
such a close relationship that the synthesis of the divine Purpose can work out
harmoniously on every possible (note that phrase) level of consciousness. If this can

take place, then the basic Thought, the fundamental Proposition of the planetary
Logos can eventually be disclosed to man.
May I remind you of the occult statement that every living being or manifested life -
from the planetary Logos down to the tiniest atom - either has been, is, or will be a
man. This has reference to the past, to the present and to the future of every
manifested life. Therefore, the fact of humanity and of that for which humanity
stands is probably the primary and major aspect of the divine purpose. Pause and
think about this statement. It is, therefore, the first clear fact which indicates the
measure and the magnitude of a human being; and until two other facts are
sequentially revealed to us, it will not be possible correctly to gauge the wider
aspects of the purpose of Sanat Kumara. Everything subhuman is slowly moving
towards a definite human experience; it is also passing through the phase of human
effort and consequent experience, or else it has moved out of that phase of limitation
and - through initiation - is drafting human nature into a state of divinity (to use a
most inadequate phrase).
The keynote, therefore, of the Lord of the World is HUMANITY for it is the basis, the
goal and the essential inner structure of all being. Humanity itself is the key to all
evolutionary processes and to all correct understanding of the divine Plan, expressing
in time and space the divine Purpose. Why HE chose that this should be so, we know
not; but it is a point to be accepted and remembered in all study of [127] the
Science of Impression because it is the factor that makes relationship and contact
possible and it is also the source of all understanding. These are most difficult things
to express and to enlarge upon, my brothers, and only the penetrating intuition can
make these matters clearer to your avid and active intelligence.
You will note, therefore, that though we call one of the major centers HUMANITY, yet
- in the last analysis - all the centers are constituted of lives progressing towards the
human stage, of those units of life who are at the human stage, and those who have
left that stage far behind but who are endowed with all the faculties and all the
knowledges wrought out into human expression in earlier planetary schemes or solar
systems, or through our own definite and characteristic planetary life.
Because of this uniformity of experience, the art of contact and the science of
impression become entirely possible and normally effective. The great and
omnipotent Lives in Shamballa can impress the omniscient Lives and lesser lives in
the Hierarchy because They share a common humanity; the hierarchical Workers or
Masters and Initiates can consequently impress humanity because of shared
experience and understanding; then the lives that compose the human family
present the goal to the subhuman kingdoms and can, and do, impress them because
of basic instinctual tendencies which are expressed in the human group but which
are latent instinctual tendencies and potential assets in the three subhuman groups.
This teaching has always been implicit in the esoteric doctrines but has not been
sufficiently emphasized, owing to the point in evolution of mankind. Today, mankind
has made such progress that these points can be made effectively. I would call to
your attention that this was the keynote of the Gospel story: the human-divine
nature of the Christ, [128] relating Him to the Father through His essential divinity,
and also to man through His essential humanity. The Christian Church gave a wrong
slant to the teaching by making Christ appear as unique, though the higher criticism
(deemed so shocking fifty years ago) has done much to correct this false impression.
The outstanding characteristic of humanity is intelligent sensitivity to impression.
Ponder on this definite and emphatic statement. The work of science is, after all,
simply the development of the knowledge of substance and of form; this knowledge

will make it possible for humanity eventually to act as the major impressing agent in
relation to the three subhuman kingdoms in nature; that is humanity's primary
responsibility. This work of relationship is practically the work of developing or the
mode of unfoldment of human sensitivity. I refer here to sensitivity to impression
from or by the Hierarchy.
The work done through the processes of initiation is intended to fit disciples and
initiates to receive impression from Shamballa; the initiate is essentially a blend of
scientific and religious training; he has been reoriented to certain phases of divine
existence which are not yet recognized by the average human being. I am
endeavoring to make clear to you the basic synthesis underlying all manifested life
upon our planet, and also the close interplay or relationship which forever exists and
expresses itself through the supreme science of contact or of impression.
The three great Centers are in close relationship at all times, even if this is not yet
recognized by the intelligent disciple; an unbroken series of impressions is ever
present, relating one center to another and bringing about an evolutionary unity of
objective, and developing (with exceeding rapidity at this time) a secondary science,
that of Invocation [129] and Evocation. This science is in reality the science of
impression in activity and not simply in theory.
The first great Invocation was uttered by the planetary Logos when He expressed the
desire to manifest and thus invoked and brought to Himself the substance needed for
His designed expression. That started the chain of being or of hierarchy; interrelation
was then set up between all "substantial" units; the more potent and the more
dynamic and greater could then impress the lesser and the weaker until gradually -
as the aeons swept by - the seven Centers were created and were in close
impressionable relationship. Of these seven we are at this time considering only
three; the others we know very little about, for they are largely composed of units of
the deva evolutions (and I would ask you to note the plurality there) and of
subhuman lives, working under impression from the head, the heart and the throat
centers of the planetary Logos.
Students are apt to make their thinking unduly complicated when they seek to
itemize and define, to separate into academic groups and brackets the multiplicity of
energies with which they feel confronted when considering the planetary and the
human centers. I would advise you that you think simply and (certainly, at first) in
terms of the three major energies as they emanate from some center, become
impressing agents, and then are again transmitted or stepped down:
1. The dynamic electrical energy of Life itself or divine potency, of embodied
Purpose, expressing through evolutionary manifestation the divine Will. It
might be well to realize that purpose emanates from the cosmic mental plane
and is the all-inclusive, synthetic, motivating principle which expresses itself
as the divine will upon the cosmic physical plane - the seven planes of our
planetary Life. This dynamic energy focuses itself through the Lives or Beings
[130] Who control and dominate Shamballa. Until the divine purpose has
been achieved, the planetary Logos holds all in manifestation through the
potency of His Will, and animates all forms with electric fire. Knowledge of
this Will and Purpose comes to the student who is constructing the
antahkarana and who is, therefore, coming under the control of the Spiritual
Triad, the threefold expression of the Monad.
2. The attractive magnetic solar energy to which we give the quite unsuitable
name of Love. It is this energy which constitutes the cohering, unifying force
which holds the manifested universe or planetary form together and is

responsible for all relationships; it is this energy which is the soul of all things
or of all forms, beginning with the anima mundi and reaching its highest point
of expression in the human soul which is the constituent factor in the fifth
kingdom in nature, the Kingdom of God or of Souls. An understanding of this
human potency comes as a man makes contact with his own soul and sets up
a stable relationship with that soul; then he becomes a soul-infused
personality. As you well know, the threefold personality is to the soul what
the Spiritual Triad is to the Monad: a clear medium of expression. Most
students are or should be today occupied with this attractive energy, for until
they have mastered the desire nature and have transmuted it into aspiration
and soul control, they cannot hope to comprehend the dynamic energy of
electric fire. This attractive magnetism is the energy dominating and
controlling the Hierarchy.
3. The intelligent activity of fire by friction. Students would be well advised to
reread A Treatise on Cosmic Fire where I deal at length with these three
conditioning energies. This third energy is the basic energy expressing itself
in the three worlds and in the four kingdoms in nature, climaxing its
expression in the creative energy of the human kingdom. [131] This energy
emanated originally (as far as our solar system and our planetary scheme are
concerned) in the first solar system and is the best proven and the best
known energy in manifestation. It is the medium for activity in all forms
through which the planetary Logos expresses Himself; it is the result of the
activity of the divine Mind, as that peculiar type of divine energy plays upon
and through all atoms and upon all atomic forms. The fission of the nucleus of
the atom in the past few years is the outer sign or demonstration that
humanity has "encompassed" the divine Mind and can now move on to
"encompass" the love or the attractive nature of divinity. Ponder upon this
statement. I know not what word to use but encompass and it is entirely
inadequate. A new and deeper esoteric terminology is badly needed.
If you will work with and reflect upon these three fundamental energies and search
for their expression within yourself, you will greatly simplify your occult thinking. Let
me here make a few more statements which you have perforce to accept
hypothetically, but which can nevertheless be substantiated by you if you arrive at
an understanding of the Law of Analogy or of Correspondences, and if you will also
accept the truism that the microcosm reflects the macrocosm and, therefore, each
human being is related to Deity through essential similarity.

• Statement One.
Dynamic electric energy entered into our planetary sphere from extra-
planetary sources and from a point of definite focus upon the cosmic mental
plane; this energy was paralleled by a secondary energy from the sun Sirius,
thus accounting for the dualism of manifestation.
• Statement Two.
This energy expanded outward from its central focus (the center called
Shamballa) and in this expansion [132] became the agency which impressed
the Plan upon the serving Hierarchy. The Plan is that measure of possibility of
immediate importance which the divine Purpose can present at any given
moment in time and space.
• Statement Three.
This process of expansion set up another focal point of energy, and the heart

center of the planet, the Hierarchy came into being; thus two centers were
created and en rapport, which constitutes a major event upon the
involutionary arc; to this, little attention has hitherto been paid. It coincided
with the advent or the arrival of the Lords of Flame from the alter ego of our
Earth, the planet Venus. They created the nucleus of the Hierarchy which - in
that far, very distant time - consisted of only forty-nine members; these were
advanced human beings and not souls awaiting incarnation in human form on
Earth, as was the case with the vast majority of these visiting Solar Angels.
• Statement Four.
Alignment between the head center and the heart center upon the
involutionary arc was thus set up; another expansion took place which
resulted, as you know well, in the creation of a new kingdom in nature, the
fourth or human kingdom. This kingdom was destined to become and is today
the third major center in the planetary life. Then another alignment, but one
which is still contained upon the involutionary arc, took place.
• Statement Five.
Today, an evolutionary alignment is taking place. The planetary center which
we call Humanity is active and vibrant, and it is now possible to "progress
along the Upward Way and create the line which links the lesser with the
higher, permitting thus an interplay." Men are rapidly moving out of the
human center into [133] the hierarchical center; the mass of men are
responding to spiritual impression.
• Statement Six.
At the same time, the heart center of the planetary Logos, the Hierarchy,
whilst it is being responsive to the invocation of the throat center, Humanity,
is becoming increasingly evocative and is itself attaining a much higher
contact and alignment with the head center of the planetary Logos; it is,
therefore, capable of receiving a constantly developing dynamic impression
from Shamballa.
• Statement Seven.
Thus a great alignment is being achieved through the relationship and the
interplay going on between these three major planetary centers; this
produces a constant inflow of energies from several different sources, and
these energies galvanize these three centers into a new and increased
activity. Invocation is arising all the time between these centers and
producing a consequent evocation of impressing energies.
In these seven statements, you have depicted a PATTERN of the present planetary
work or the present logoic thesis. An involutionary alignment (the guarantee of
future successful alignments) constitutes most ancient history; an evolutionary
alignment in which all three centers are involved is constantly producing an interplay
of energies as well as a constantly successful impression of one center upon another.
Humanity, as the throat center of the planetary Logos and the prime planetary
creative agency (which modern science demonstrates), invokes the heart center, the
Hierarchy, and then receives the needed impression which will result in the
developing civilizations and cultures as well as the eventual appearance on Earth of
the fifth or spiritual [134] kingdom. The Hierarchy or the planetary heart center
invokes Shamballa, the planetary head center, and the Plan - as an expression of the
Purpose - is impressed upon the hierarchical consciousness. If there is redundancy in
these various comments of mine, it is entirely intentional; repetition serves the
purposes of accurate presentation where esotericism is concerned.

As the invocative system spreads and a greater alignment is attained, Shamballa -
the planetary head center - invokes energies outside the planetary life and the inflow
of cosmic and solar energies will be very much greater; for this the esotericists of the
world must be prepared. It will also produce the advent or appearance of many
AVATARS, bringing with Them many and very different kinds of energies to those
which hitherto have controlled human affairs and the events and evolution of the
other, the subhuman kingdoms in nature. With the reappearance of the Christ as the
focal point or the supreme Agent of the planetary heart center, a new era or "divine
epoch" will be instituted. The Avatar of Synthesis will draw very close to humanity
and He will inaugurate the "reign of Avatars" Who will be embodied Purpose and
spiritual Will; They will initiate both the Hierarchy and Humanity into phases of the
divine character of which, at present, nothing is known and for which we have no
terminology that could convey the exact facts and nature. All that I am attempting to
do here is to give you a general outline of events which may lie centuries ahead but
which will inevitably occur - once the Christ is again in physical Presence and
recognition on Earth.
H.P.B. speaks in The Secret Doctrine of the "three periodical vehicles," referring as
he does so to the Monad, the Soul and the Personality; he is dealing, therefore, with
the nine aspects of divinity which connote the nine major initiations and those divine
characteristics through which [135] the three major aspects of divinity reflect
themselves. In this connection, it is well known to students that the Monad
expresses itself through the Spiritual Triad, the Soul through the three aspects of the
Egoic Lotus, and the Personality through the three mechanical vehicles. It will be
obvious to you surely that these three periodical vehicles are under the influence or
impression of the three major planetary centers and are, therefore, finally
conditioned by the three major energies to which I referred earlier in this section. I
do not feel it to be necessary to enlarge upon this basic relation; it is that which
integrates the human soul into the vast general whole and makes the individual an
intrinsic part of the sumtotal.
There is one aspect of the Science of Impression upon which I have not yet touched
and that is the place of the centers as focal points, as transmitters or as agencies for
the seven ray energies. It is known to esotericists that each of the seven centers
comes under the influence or is the recipient of some ray energy, and there is a
general acceptance of the fact that the head center is the agent of the first Ray of
Will or Power, the heart center is the custodian of second Ray energy of Love-
Wisdom, whilst the third Ray of active creative Intelligence passes through and
energizes the throat center. These Rays of Aspect do find expression through the
three centers above the diaphragm, and - on the larger scale - through Shamballa,
the Hierarchy and Humanity. It is, however, equally true that Shamballa is primarily
second ray as it is expressed, because that is the ray of the present solar system of
which Shamballa is a part; and that the first ray, or its dynamic life aspect, is
focused in the heart, for the heart is the center of life. The great center which we call
Humanity is predominantly governed by the third Ray of Active Intelligence. This ray
energy arrives at the throat center via the head and the heart centers. I [136] am
pointing this out for two reasons which must form part of your thinking as you study
this science:
1. All the centers come under the influence of all the rays, and this must surely
be obvious in relation to average and undeveloped human beings. Were this
not so, such human beings would be unable to respond to first ray, second
ray and third ray energy, for the centers above the diaphragm are, in their
case, inactive.

2. In time and space and during the evolutionary process, it is not possible to
say which center is expressing the energy of any particular ray, for there is a
constant movement and activity. The center at the base of the spine is
frequently the expression of first ray energies. This is apt to be confusing. The
human mind seeks to make everything precise, stable, to bracket certain
relations or to assign certain centers to certain ray energies. This cannot be
done.
At the end of the world cycle, when divine purpose is fulfiled and the evolutionary
process has brought about the changes and adjustments needed for the full
expression of the Will of Sanat Kumara, then the situation will be different and men
will know (as the Members of the Hierarchy know) which centers express the seven
ray energies. It must be remembered also that the Rays of Attribute shift and
change constantly; for instance, humanity as the planetary throat center is under the
constant influence of the seventh ray, as is the solar plexus center of the planet. To
that subdiaphragmatic center I give no name. Though the human throat center is
primarily expressing the third ray, there is an interesting situation to be noted in this
connection: two ray energies control this center at this time. [137]
The throat center of the average integrated personality is governed by the third ray
and is strongly energized by third ray energies (again seven in number), whilst the
throat center of the spiritual aspirant, of disciples and initiates below the third
initiation is responding primarily to seventh ray influence, and this is peculiarly the
case now as the seventh ray is in incarnation. The rays which are manifesting at any
particular time affect powerfully all the other centers as well as the one through
which they are normally expressing. This is a point oft forgotten.
It is needless for me to point out that - as man progresses upon the Path of Return -
he consistently comes under the impression of the center of which he is an integral
part: that is, first of all, the planetary throat center, the human family; then, as a
soul, he comes under the impression of the Hierarchy, the planetary heart center,
and at that point he begins to express the combined energies of the intelligence and
of love; finally, on the Path of Initiation, he comes under the impression of
Shamballa, the planetary head center, and becomes a participant in the divine
Purpose and an Agent of the divine Plan.
It is therefore literally and eternally true that the same energetic Life pours through
the planetary centers, into and through the three periodical vehicles of the
incarnated Monad, and finally into and through the three centers in the human
etheric body which correspond to the three major centers of the planetary Logos.
There is, therefore, nowhere to be found any basis for separation or any possible
point of separation or of essential division. Any sense of separateness is due simply
to ignorance and to the fact that certain energies are as yet unable to make
adequate impression upon the human consciousness, functioning in time and space.
The essential synthesis exists and the end is sure and [138] inevitable; unity is
attainable because unity exists and the sense of separateness is simply the Great
Illusion.
It was in order to hasten the dispelling of this great illusion of separateness in the
minds of men, and to bring about the emergence of the basic existing unity, that the
new world prayer was given to men and its use on a world wide scale inaugurated.
Elsewhere (The Reappearance of the Christ) I have told you of the origin and the
impulsing of the Great Invocation. Here I am simply placing it before you as a fitting
conclusion to this portion of my labor of love in the presentation of truth, and as a
possible starting point in yours.

From the point of Light within the Mind of God
Let light stream forth into the minds of men.
Let Light descend on Earth.
From the point of Love within the Heart of God
Let love stream forth into the hearts of men.
May Christ return to Earth.
From the center where the Will of God is known
Let purpose guide the little wills of men -
The purpose which the Masters know and serve.
From the center which we call the race of men
Let the Plan of Love and Light work out
And may it seal the door where evil dwells.
Let Light and Love and Power restore the Plan on Earth. [139]

TEACHING ON THE ETHERIC VEHICLE
I. The Nature of the Etheric Body
Much that I may say here may be familiar to a certain extent, because there is a vast
amount of information anent the etheric body scattered throughout my various
books. It will have its value however if students can receive in a few pages a general
idea and the basic concepts which underlie the teaching - or should I say, the fact? If
they have the time, students would find it of profit to reread what I said; run their
eyes rapidly through the books and papers in search of the word "etheric." They will
never regret it. Life itself, the training to be given in the future, the conclusions of
science and a new mode of civilization will all increasingly be focused on this unique
substance which is the true form to which all physical bodies in every kingdom in
nature conform. Note that phraseology.
The attitude of occultism is, at this time, relatively negative to the fact and the
nature of the etheric body. People are ready to admit its existence, but the dominant
factors in their consciousness are the fact of the physical body (around whose
comfort, security and care all life seems woven) and the fact of the astral or
emotional nature. Not one among them, or among occult students generally, pays
any attention to the etheric body, and there is a great hiatus or gap in consciousness
today (only this time normally and rightly) between the personality and the Spiritual
Triad. This gap will be bridged by the building of the antahkarana, and this can only
be built by advanced students. There is no such planned bridge for the gap in [140]
consciousness between the physical body and the etheric counterpart. The etheric
body exists in subtle etheric matter, and factually there is no true gap; there is
simply the ignoring by humanity of an aspect of the physical body which is of far
more importance than is the dense physical vehicle. The consciousness of men today
is physical-astral, and the factor of conditioning energies is ignored, overlooked, and
- from the angle of consciousness - non-existent.
One of the main obligations of occult students today is to testify to the fact of the
etheric body; modern science is already thus testifying because its researches have
now landed it in the realm of energy. Electro-therapy, the growing recognition that
man is electrical in nature, and the realization that even the atom in apparently
inanimate objects is a living vibrant entity substantiate this occult point of view.
Generally speaking, science has preceded esotericism in its recognition of energy as
a dominant factor in all form expression. Theosophists and others pride themselves
on being ahead of human thinking, but such is not the case. H. P. B., an initiate of
high standing, presented views ahead of science, but that does not apply to the
exponents of the theosophical teaching. The fact of all manifested forms being forms
of energy, and that the true human form is no exception, is the gift of science to
humanity and not the gift of occultism. The demonstration that light and matter are
synonymous terms is also a scientific conclusion. Esotericists have always known
this, but their aggressive and foolish presentations of the truth have greatly
handicapped the Hierarchy. Frequently the Masters have deplored the technique of
the theosophists and other occult groups. When the new presentation of the occult
teaching made its appearance through the inspired activity of H. P. B., a number (an
increasing number as the years slipped by) of theosophical members presented the
occult [141] teaching in such a manner that it travestied the true teaching and
outraged the intellectual perception of the mass of inquiring and intelligent men. The
teaching on the etheric body is an instance of this. H. P. B. was largely responsible,
because of utilizing the word "astral" to cover a mass of information anent the

etheric as well as the astral. This was due to the realization of the fact that the astral
body was doomed in a few generations (relatively speaking) to disappear, and for H.
P. B. in particular was already non-existent, owing to the advanced point in evolution
reached by this disciple.
Realizing that the etheric body was an expression always of the dominant energy
controlling mankind in any particular cycle, H. P. B. used the term "astral body" as
interchangeable with the etheric body. The etheric body, in the vast majority of
cases is the vehicle or the instrument of astral energy. The mass of men are still
Atlantean or astral in their natures, and this means a far larger percentage than the
average occultist is willing to admit. H. P. B. was, however, truthful and knew that at
that time and for several hundred years afterwards (probably about three hundred
years) the astral body would continue to govern the mass of human reactions and
their consequent daily life expression. Hence the apparent confusion in the writings
between these two "bodies."

Here is a basic statement - one that is so basic that it governs and controls all
thinking anent the etheric body:
The etheric body is primarily composed of the dominant energy or
energies to which the man, the group, the nation, or the world reacts
in any particular time cycle or world period.
If you are to understand clearly, it is essential that I lay down certain propositions
anent the etheric body which [142] should govern all the student's thinking; if they
do not, he will be approaching the truth from the wrong angle; this, modern science
does not do. The limitation of modern science is its lack of vision; the hope of
modern science is that it does recognize truth when proven. Truth in all
circumstances is essential and in this matter science gives a desirable lead, even
though it ignores and despises occultism, Occult scientists handicap themselves
either because of their presentation of the truth or because of a false humility. Both
are equally bad.
There are six major propositions which govern all consideration of the etheric body,
and I would like to present them to students as a first step:
1. There is nothing in the manifested universe - solar, planetary or the various
kingdoms in nature - which does not possess an energy form, subtle and
intangible yet substantial, which controls, governs and conditions the outer
physical body. This is the etheric body.
2. This energy form - underlying the solar system, the planets and all forms
within their specific rings-pass-not - is itself conditioned and governed by the
dominant solar or planetary energy which ceaselessly and without break in
time, creates it, changes and qualifies it. The etheric body is subject to
ceaseless change. This, being true of the Macrocosm, is equally true of man,
the microcosm, and - through the agency of humanity - will eventually and
mysteriously prove true of all the subhuman kingdoms in nature. Of this, the
animal kingdom and the vegetable kingdom are already evidences.
3. The etheric body is composed of interlocking and circulating lines of force
emanating from one or [143] other, or from one or many, of the seven planes
or areas of consciousness of our planetary Life.

4. These lines of energy and this closely interlocking system of streams of force
are related to seven focal points or centers to be found within the etheric
body. These centers are related, each of them, to certain types of incoming
energy. When the energy reaching the etheric body is not related to a
particular center, then that center remains quiescent and unawakened; when
it is related and the center is sensitive to its impact, then that center becomes
vibrant and receptive and develops as a controlling factor in the life of the
man on the physical plane.
5. The dense physical body, composed of atoms - each with its own individual
life, light and activity - is held together by and is expressive of the energies
which compose the etheric body. These, as will be apparent, are of two
natures:
a. The energies which form (through interlocked "lines of forceful
energy") the underlying etheric body, as a whole and in relation to all
physical forms. This form is qualified then by the general life and
vitality of the plane on which the Dweller in the body functions, and
therefore where his consciousness is normally focused.
b. The particularized or specialized energies by which the individual (at
this particular point in evolution, through the circumstances of his daily
life and his heredity) chooses to govern his daily activities.
6. The etheric body has many centers of force, responsive to the manifold
energies of our planetary Life, but we shall consider only the seven major
[144] centers which respond to the inflowing energies of the seven rays. All
lesser centers are conditioned by the seven major centers; this is a point
which students are apt to forget. It is here that knowledge of the egoic and of
the personality rays is of prime usefulness.
It can be seen, therefore, how exceedingly important this subject of energy
becomes, because it controls and makes the man what he is at any given moment,
and likewise indicates the plane on which he should function, and the method
whereby he should govern his environment, circumstances and relationships. If this
is grasped by him, it will enable him to realize that he will have to shift his whole
attention from the physical or the astral planes on to the etheric levels of awareness;
his objective will then be to determine what energy should control his daily
expression (or energies, if he is an advanced disciple). He will realize also that as his
attitude, attainment and comprehension shift to ever higher levels, his etheric body
will be constantly changing and responding to the newer energies. These energies he
will be wilfuly bringing in; this is the right use of the word "wilful."
It is not easy for the average seer or clairvoyant to distinguish the etheric body from
its environment or to isolate its particular type of energy or livingness, for the reason
that its automaton, the physical body - being composed of vibrant energetic atoms -
is itself in constant movement, and such movement involves a necessary radiation as
a consequence; animal magnetism is an illustration of this radiation. This emanation
from the dense physical body normally and naturally mingles with the energies of the
etheric body, and thus only the trained seer can differentiate between the two,
particularly within the physical body itself. [145]
From one point of view the etheric body can be looked at in two ways: first, as it
interpenetrates, underlies and occupies the entire physical organism and, secondly,
as it extends beyond the physical form and surrounds it like an aura. According to
the point in evolution will be the extent of the area which the etheric body covers
beyond the outside of the physical body. It may extend for a few or many inches. It

is only in this area that the vital body can be studied with relative ease, once the
emanatory activity of the physical atoms is offset or allowed for.
Within the physical body, the network of the etheric body is to be found permeating
every single part. It is peculiarly associated at this time with the nervous system,
which is fed, nourished, controlled and galvanized by its etheric counterpart. This
counterpart is present in millions of tiny streams or lines of energy, to which the
Eastern occultist has given the name "nadis." These nadis are the carriers of energy.
They are in fact the energy itself and carry the quality of energy from some area of
consciousness in which the "dweller in the body" may happen to be focused. This
may be the astral plane or the planes of the Spiritual Triad, for none of the energies
can control the physical body from any plane, no matter how high, except in this
manner. According to the focus of the consciousness, the psychic state of awareness,
the potency of aspiration or desire, and the point in evolution or the spiritual status,
so will be the type of energy carried by the nadis, passing from them to the outer
nervous system. This general proposition must be accepted, for the whole subject is
as yet too intricate, and the mechanism of observation of the student too
undeveloped, for me to enter into greater detail. This will suffice as an initial
hypothesis upon which to work.
The amount of energy and the type of energy controlling any aspect of the nervous
system is conditioned by the [146] center in its immediate area. A center is a
distributing agency, in the last analysis. Even though that energy will affect the
entire body, the center most responsive to the quality and type will potently affect
the nadis, and therefore the nerves, in its immediate environment.
It must always be remembered that the seven centers are not within the dense
physical body. They exist only in etheric matter and in the etheric so-called aura,
outside the physical body. They are closely related to the dense physical body by the
network of nadis. Five of the centers are to be found in the etheric counterpart of the
spinal column, and the energy passes (through large and responsive nadis) through
the vertebrae of the spine and circulates then throughout the etheric body as it is
interiorly active within the physical vehicle. The three head centers exist, one just
above the top of the head, another just in front of the eyes and forehead, and the
third at the back of the head, just above where the spinal column ends. This makes
eight centers but is in reality seven, as the center at the back of the head is not
counted in the initiation process, any more than is the spleen.
The powerful effect of the inflow of energy, via the energy body, has itself
automatically created these centers or these reservoirs of force, these focal points of
energy, which the spiritual man must learn to use and through the means of which
he can direct energy where needed. Each of these seven centers has appeared in the
course of human evolution in response to energy from one or other, or from several,
of the seven rays. The impact of these rays upon the etheric body, emanating as
they do periodically and ceaselessly from the seven rays, is so potent that the seven
areas in the etheric body become more highly sensitized than the rest of the vehicle,
and these in due time develop into responsive distributing centers. The effect of
these seven centers upon the physical body in due time produces a condensation or
a [147] state of what is called "attracted response" from dense matter, and thus the
seven major sets of endocrine glands slowly came into functioning activity. It must
here be remembered that the whole development of the etheric body falls into two
historical stages:
1. That in which the etheric energy, flowing through responsive centers and
creating the endocrine glands as a consequence, gradually began to have a
definite effect upon the blood stream; the energy worked through that

medium solely for a very long time. This still remains true, for the life aspect
of energy animates the blood, through the medium of the centers and their
agents, the glands. Hence the words in the Bible that "the blood is the life."
2. As the race of men developed, and consciousness grew greater and certain
great expansions took place, the centers began to extend their usefulness and
to use the nadis, and thus to work upon and through the nervous system; this
produced conscious and planned activity upon the physical plane,
commensurate to the man's place in evolution.
Thus the incoming energy forming the etheric body created a needed etheric
mechanism with its corresponding dense physical counterparts; it therefore, as will
be noted from its relationship to the blood via the glands, and to the nervous system
via the nadis (both through the medium of the seven centers), became the
transmitter of two aspects of energy: one of which was kama-manasic (desire-lower
mind) and the other atmic-buddhic (spiritual will - spiritual love) in the case of
advanced humanity. Herein lies full opportunity for all, as the Law of Evolution
proceeds to dominate all manifestation. What is true of the Macrocosm is true also of
the microcosm. [148]

II. The Basis of Non-Separateness
The use of the creative imagination is of value here. It may not give a true picture on
all points, but it will convey one great reality. The reality to which I refer is that
there is no possible separateness in our manifested planetary life - or elsewhere for
that matter, even beyond our planetary ring-pass-not. The concept of separateness,
of individual isolation, is an illusion of the unillumined human mind. Everything -
every form, every organism within all forms, all aspects of manifested life in every
kingdom in nature - is intimately related each to each through the planetary etheric
body (of which all etheric bodies are integral parts) which substands all that is. Little
as it may mean, and useless as it may appear, the table at which you write, the
flower you hold in your hand, the horse on which you ride, the man to whom you
talk, are sharing with you the vast circulatory life of the planet as it streams into,
through and out of every aspect of the form nature. The only differences which exist
are those in consciousness, and peculiarly so in the consciousness of man and of the
Black Lodge. There is only the ONE LIFE, pouring through the mass of forms which,
in their sumtotal, constitute our planet - as we know it.
All forms are related, interrelated and interdependent; the planetary etheric body
holds them together so that a cohesive, coherent, expressive Whole is presented to
the eye of man, or one great unfolding consciousness to the perception of the
Hierarchy. Lines of light pass from form to form. Some are bright and some are dim;
some move or circulate with rapidity, others are lethargic and slow in their [149]
interplay; some seem to circulate with facility in some particular kingdom in nature
and some in another; some come from one direction and some from a different one,
but all are in movement all the time; it is a constant circulation. All are passing on
and into and through, and there is not one single atom in the body which is not the
recipient of this living, moving energy; there is no single form that is not "kept in
shape and livingness" by this determined inflow and outflow, and there is therefore
no part of the body of manifestation (which is an integral part of the planetary
vehicle of the Lord of the World) which is not in complex but complete touch with His
divine intention - through the medium of HIS three major centers: Shamballa, the
Hierarchy, and Humanity. In the multiplicity of the forms of which His great
composite vehicle is composed, there is no need for Him to be in conscious touch. It
is, however, possible, should He so desire it, but it would profit Him not, any more
than it would profit you to be in conscious touch with some atom in some organ of
your physical body. He works, however, through His three major centers: Shamballa,
the planetary head center; the Hierarchy, the planetary heart center; and Humanity,
the planetary throat center. The play of the energies elsewhere (controlled from
these three centers) is automatic. The objective of the circulating energies - as it
appears to us when we seek to penetrate divine purpose - is to vivify all parts of His
body, with the view of promoting the unfoldment of consciousness therein.
This is basically true from the angle of Shamballa "where the Will of God is known";
it is partially true of those Members of the Hierarchy Who sense the Purpose and
formulate the Plan and then present it in an understandable form to the lesser
initiates and disciples and aspirants. These two groups work entirely on the
consciousness side, which motivates and directs (as needed) the moving, [150]
circulating energies. This is not true of the bulk of humanity, who are conscious but
only conscious within their ring-pass-not, and are therefore fundamentally separated
off by their emphasis upon form as it exists in the three worlds - the dense physical
levels of the cosmic physical plane. On the lowest of these levels, the outer physical
form reacts and responds to the circulating energies through the medium of the
etheric energy which comes from the lowest of the four levels of the etheric plane.

Gradually the consciousness within these forms reacts to the nature of the outer
vehicle as it is impulsed from etheric levels, and a profoundly significant
development takes place. This development - to make a wide generalization - falls
into three categories:
1. The outer form changes under the impact of the etheric energies entering in,
passing through and disappearing from (ceaselessly aeon after aeon) the
form. The energy that is there one minute is gone the next.
2. This ceaseless play of energy varies in time and space, and moves
lethargically, rapidly or rhythmically according to the type or nature of the
form through which it is at any moment passing.
3. The energy of the etheric plane changes considerably as the aeons pass
away, according to the direction or the source from which it comes. The
directing energy alters significantly as evolution proceeds.
Students have been apt to speak simply of the etheric body as an entire integral
entity and as constituted solely of etheric substance, forgetting that the etheric body
is the medium for the transfer of many types of energy. They forget the following
facts: [151]
1. That the etheric body is itself composed of four types of substance, each of
which is definitely specialized and found on one or other of the etheric levels.
2. That these substances, functioning actively in any particular etheric body,
create a network of channels; they produce fine tubes (if I may use so
inappropriate a word) which take the general form of the dense material or
tangible form with which they may be associated. This form underlies every
part of the physical body and can be seen extending for a certain distance
outside of the recognizable form. This etheric body is not in reality an ovoid
(as the older occult books teach) but usually takes the form or general outline
of the physical vehicle with which it is associated. When, however, the head
center is awakened and functioning, then the ovoid appearance is far more
frequent.
3. These channels or tubes - according to the type of energy they carry - pass to
certain areas of the body, via three main stations:
a. The seven major centers, of which you have heard much.
b. The twenty-one minor centers, which I outlined for you earlier. (A
Treatise on the Seven Rays, Vol. IV., pp. 72-73.)
c. The forty-nine focal points, scattered all over the body.
4. All these centers and focal points for the transmission of energy are
connected each with each by larger channels than the mass of channels which
constitute the etheric body as a whole, because many lesser channels and
lines of force or energy merge and blend as they near a center or a focal
point. [152]
5. The mass of the smaller channels or the channeling tubes of energy
eventually create in all forms that layer of corresponding nerves which are not
yet recognized by medical science but which are like an intermediary web or
network. These relate the etheric body as a whole to the entire two-fold
nervous system (cerebro-spinal and the sympathetic nervous systems) which
science does recognize. It is this system underlying the nerves which is the
true response apparatus and which - via the brain - telegraphs information to
the mind or, via the brain and the mind, keeps the soul informed. It is this

system of nadis which is used in full consciousness by the initiate who has
related the Spiritual Triad and the soul-infused personality, and has therefore
seen the soul-body, the causal body or the egoic lotus totally disappear, being
no longer of any true importance. There is a peculiar and at present
inexplicable relation between this system of nadis and the antahkarana when
it is in process of creation or is created.
6. The physical body, therefore, like so much else in nature, is itself triple in
design. There is:
a. The etheric body.
b. The substantial nadis.
c. The dense physical body.
These form one unit and in incarnation are inseparable.
7. The centers in their totality and the many focal points of contact found in the
etheric body are responsible for the creation and preservation of the
endocrine glandular system in a form either limited and inadequate, or
representative of the spiritual man and entirely adequate. The nadis, in their
turn, [153] are responsible for the creation and precipitation of the twofold
nervous system. This is a point most carefully to be borne in mind and is the
clue to the problem of creativity.
8. The type of the etheric substance "substanding" any form is dependent upon
two factors:
a. The kingdom of nature concerned. Basically the four kingdoms draw
their pranic life each from one or other of the four levels of etheric
substance, counting upwards from the lowest:
1. The mineral kingdom is sustained from plane 1.
2. The vegetable kingdom is sustained from plane 2.
3. The animal kingdom is sustained from plane 3.
4. The human kingdom is sustained from plane 4.
That was the original condition; but as evolution proceeded and there
was an interacting emanation established between all the kingdoms,
this automatically changed. It was this "esoteric emanating change"
which, aeons ago, produced animal-man. I give this as an illustration
and a key to a great mystery.
b. Curiously enough, in the human kingdom (and only in the human
kingdom) the etheric body is now composed of all four types of etheric
substance. The reason for this is that eventually (when mankind is
spiritually developed) each of these four planes or types of etheric
substance will be responsive to the [154] four higher levels of the
cosmic physical plane - the etheric levels, to which we give the names:
the logoic level, the monadic, the atmic level and the buddhic. This will
happen as a result of conscious growth and initiation.
9. It must also be remembered that the substance of which these etheric
channels or channeling tubes are composed is planetary prana, the life-giving,
health-giving energy of the planet itself. Through these tubes, however, may
flow all or any of the possible energies - emotional, mental, egoic, manasic,
buddhic or atmic, according to the point in evolution which the man
concerned has reached. This always means that several energies are pouring

through these tubes, unless the point in evolution is exceedingly low or unless
one is dealing with a cleavage; these various energies are fused and blended
together but find their own focal points in the etheric body when entering
directly within the circumference of the dense physical body. Just as it can be
said of the soul or of the Deity, so it can be said of the energetic or vital
etheric body or entity: "Having pervaded this whole universe with a fragment
of myself, I remain."

The word "prana" is almost as much misunderstood as are the words "etheric" or
"astral." It is this loose connotation which is responsible for the great ignorance
prevalent in occult circles.
Prana might be defined as the life-essence of every plane in the sevenfold area which
we call the cosmic physical plane. It is the LIFE of the planetary Logos, reduced
within limits, animating, vivifying and correlating all the seven [155] planes (in
reality the seven subplanes of the cosmic physical plane) and all that is to be found
within and upon them. The cosmic sutratma or life-thread of the planetary Logos
enters His manifestation on the highest of our planes (the logoic plane) and, through
the instrumentality of the informing Lives to be found in Shamballa (which, I must
remind you, is not the name of a locality) is brought into contact with, or is related
to, the matter of which the manifested worlds are made - formless, as on the cosmic
etheric planes (our highest four planes), or tangible and objective, as on the lower
three planes. The fact that we call only that tangible which we can see or touch and
contact through the medium of the five senses is entirely wrong. All is regarded as
belonging to the world of form which is found on the physical plane, the astral plane
and the levels of the lower mind. This lower mental plane, referred to above,
includes the level on which the causal body is found - the plane in which "the lotus of
love is floating," as the Old Commentary puts it. All that lies above that on mental
levels, and on up to the highest of the cosmic physical planes, is formless. These
distinctions must be most carefully borne in mind.
There is within the human body a wonderful symbol of distinction between the higher
etheric levels and the lower so-called physical levels. The diaphragm exists,
separating that part of the body which contains the heart, throat and head, plus the
lungs, from all the rest of the organs of the body; these are all of them of the utmost
importance from the angle of LIFE, and that which is determined in the head,
impulsed from the heart, sustained by the breath and expressed through the
apparatus of the throat determines what the man IS.
Below the diaphragm are found organs whose use is far more objective even if of
great importance; though each [156] of these lower organs has a life and purpose of
its own, their existence and functioning is impulsed, determined and conditioned by
the life and rhythm emanating from the higher part of the vehicle. This is not easy
for the average man to comprehend, but any serious limitation or physical disease
above the diaphragm has a compelling and serious effect on all that is found below
the diaphragm. The reverse is not the case to the same extent.
This symbolizes the potency and essentiality of the etheric body, both microcosmic
and macrocosmic, and the macrocosmic expression of the fourfold Life conditions all
living forms.
Each of the four ethers, as they are sometimes called, is intended - as far as man is
concerned - to be a channel or expression of the four cosmic ethers. At present this
is very far from being the case. It can only truly be so when the antahkarana is built
and acts, therefore, as a direct channel for the cosmic ethers to which we have given

the names of universal life, monadic intensity, divine purpose and pure reason.
Ponder for a while on these types of energy and creatively imagine their effect when,
in due course of time and spiritual unfoldment, they can pour unrestrictedly into and
through the etheric body of a human being. At present, the etheric body is
responsive to energies from:
1. The physical world. These are not principles but are the feeders and
controllers of the animal appetites.
2. The astral world, determining the desires, emotions and aspirations which the
man will express and go after upon the physical plane.
3. The lower mental plane, the lower mind, developing self-will, selfishness,
separateness and the direction and trend of the life upon the physical plane.
It is [157] this directive instinct which, when turned to higher matters,
eventually opens the door to the higher cosmic etheric energies.
4. The soul, the principle of individualism, the reflection in the microcosm of the
divine intention and - speaking symbolically - being to the entire monadic
expression that which "stands at the midway point," the instrument of true
sensitivity, of responsive ability, the spiritual counterpart of the solar plexus
center which is found at the midway point between that which lies above the
diaphragm and that which is found below it.
When the antahkarana is constructed and the higher three are directly related to the
lower three, then the soul is no longer needed. Then, reflecting this event, the four
etheric levels become simply the transmitters of the energy emanating from the four
cosmic etheric levels. The channel is then direct, completed and unimpeded; the
etheric network of light is then of great brilliance, and all the centers in the body are
awakened and functioning in unison and rhythm. Then - corresponding to the directly
related Monad and Personality - the head center, the thousand-petalled lotus, the
brahmarandra, is as directly related to the center at the base of the spine. Thus
complete dualism, in place of the previous triple nature of the divine manifestation,
is established:
1. Monad - Personality.
With the threefold soul no longer needed.
2. Head center - Center at base of spine.
With the intermediate five centers no longer required. [158]
The Old Commentary says, in this connection:
"Then the three that ranked as all that was, functioning as one and
controlling all the seven, no longer are. The seven who responded to
the three, responding to the One, no longer hear the triple call which
determined all that was. Only the two remain to show the world the
beauty of the living God, the wonder of the Will-to-Good, the Love
which animates the Whole. These two are One, and thus the work,
completed, stands. And then the Angels sing." [159]

III. Planetary and Human Centers
There is a factor bearing upon the etheric body to which very little reference has
ever been made, the reason being that it would have been utterly useless
information. Let me embody it in a tabulated statement, beginning with a few points
earlier imparted but which should here be repeated for clarity and placed in proper
sequence:
1. The planetary Logos works through the medium of the three major centers:
a. The Center where the will of God is known: Shamballa.
b. The Center where the love of God is manifest: the Hierarchy.
c. The Center where the intelligence of God is producing the evolutionary
process: Humanity.
2. The three major centers, both planetary and human, exist in etheric
substance and they may or may not produce physical correspondences. All
the Masters, for instance, do not work through a physical vehicle. They
nevertheless have an etheric body composed of the substance of the cosmic
etheric levels - buddhic, atmic, monadic and logoic levels - and these levels
are the four cosmic ethers, the higher correspondence of our etheric planes;
these higher levels are the four levels of the cosmic physical plane. Until They
choose, at the sixth Initiation of Decision, one of the seven Paths of Ultimate
Destiny, the Masters function in Their cosmic etheric bodies.
These three major energy centers are closely related to each other, and
through his own individual major centers (the head, the heart and the throat)
[160] the disciple is in relation with the three planetary centers. I would have
you ponder on this statement for it has practical value.
3. The Monad, as you know, is to be found on the cosmic second etheric level,
called the monadic plane. When the antahkarana has been built, then cosmic
etheric substance can be slowly substituted for the ordinary and familiar
etheric substance which "substands" the dense physical body of a man.
4. The ray upon which the Monad is to be found - one of the three major rays
and, therefore, related to one of the three major centers - conditions:
a. The disciple's absorption into one of the three departments of
hierarchical work, i.e., a first ray soul will go normally into such an
Ashram as that of the Master M. in the department of the Manu; a
second ray disciple will pass into a second ray Ashram such as mine
(D.K.) or that of the Master K.H. and therefore into the department of
the Christ; a third ray soul will be absorbed into one of the Ashrams
(and there are many) functioning under the Lord of Civilization, the
Master R.
b. All who come into incarnation upon one of the Rays of Attribute - the
fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh rays - find their way finally on to one of
the three major Rays of Aspect. The changes of shifts in ray focus are
made when the etheric body has in it an adequate measure of the
substance of the lowest of the cosmic ethers, the buddhic substance;
this is basic for all, on all the rays, for at the end of the age, when
cosmic etheric substance [161] composes the etheric vehicles of the
initiate, the three rays become the two rays, and later another

absorption takes place into the second Ray of Love-Wisdom which is
the ray of our present solar system.
You can see, therefore, what conditioning factors the various energies become when
appropriated and used, and how their substance, or rather the presence of certain
energies in the etheric body of the personality, are essential before certain initiations
can be taken. The theme is too complex to be enlarged upon here, but I would ask
you to consider with care the various statements I have made and then seek
illumination within yourself.
The rays are the seven emanations from the "seven Spirits before the throne of
God"; Their emanations come from the monadic level of awareness or from the
second cosmic etheric plane. In a certain sense it could be said that these seven
great and living Energies are in their totality the etheric vehicle of the planetary
Logos. The evolutionary processes can equally well be stated to be those of
eliminating the physical substance lying between the dense physical body and the
astral sentient body, and substituting substance of the four highest planes, the four
cosmic ethers. Physically speaking, it is this etheric substitution which enables a man
successively to take the five initiations which make him a Master of the Wisdom.
The first initiation is purely the concern of the man's own soul, and the moment that
that initiation has been taken, a measure of buddhic energy can enter and the
process of transference of the higher ethers and their substitution for the lower can
go forward. This, as you may well imagine, produces conflict; the personality etheric
body rejects the incoming higher ether, and thus crises are produced in the initiate's
life. [162]
Progress and initiation have been presented to us mainly in terms of character-
building and of service to humanity. This approach most surely also produces conflict
and the personality fights the soul. But paralleling this well known conflict, another
battle goes on between the ethers composing the disciple's etheric body and the
downpouring higher ethers. Of this a man is not so conscious, but the battle is a very
real one, affecting primarily the health of the physical body, and falls into five natural
stages which we call initiations. The symbolism of the Rod of Initiation teaches us
that (during the initiatory process) this Rod, directed by the Christ or by the Lord of
the World, as the case may be, is used to stabilize the higher ethers within the
personality by an access of applied energy which enables the initiate to retain that
which is from above, in order that "as above, so below."
There are three angles from which the etheric body must be considered:
1. As the mechanism which externalizes itself through the nadis, or that fine
system of related lines of force which, in their turn, externalize themselves
through the physical system of nerves.
2. As a transmitter of many different types of energy, coming from many
different sources; these energies run through or along (both words are
equally true) the lines of force which underlie the nadis. A while ago I used
the word "tubes," thus inferring a network of tubes through which the
transmitted energies can pour; here you have a case where words are wholly
inadequate and even misleading.
3. These energies - according to their source, quality and purpose - create the
seven major centers which condition the many smaller subsidiary centers
[163] and finally externalize themselves through the seven major glands of
the endocrine system.

I have said earlier that the intersecting energies in the etheric body of the planet are
at this time a network of squares. When the creative process is complete and
evolution has done its work, these squares will become a network of triangles.
Necessarily this is a symbolic way of speaking. In the Book of Revelations which was
dictated 1900 years ago by the disciple who is now known as the Master Hilarion,
reference is made to the "city which stands four-square." The etheric vehicle of the
planet was inherited from a former solar system, with the purpose or intention in
view of its transformation into a network of triangles in this solar system. In the next
one of the triplicity of solar systems (the third or last) in which the will of God works
out, the etheric body will begin as a network of triangles, but this will be resolved
into a network of interlinked circles or of linked rings, indicating the fulfilment of
interlocking relationships. In this present system, the result of evolution, as far as
the etheric body is concerned, will be the contact established between all three
points of each triangle, making a ninefold contact and a ninefold flow of energy; this
is consistent with the fact that nine is the number of initiation, and by the time the
destined number of disciples have taken the nine possible initiations, this triangular
formation of the planetary etheric body will be complete.
The idea can be conveyed symbolically by the diagram at the side, which pictures the
triangular formation and the mode of a dual growth or progression and expansion of
the network because, starting with the initial triangle, two points only are left for the
processes of extension. [164]

The initial triangle was formed by Sanat Kumara, and we call the three energies
which circulate through its medium the three major Rays of Aspect. The four Rays of
Attribute formed their own triangles and yet, in a paradoxical manner, they are
responsible for the "squares" through which their energies at this time pass. Thus
the work of transforming the inherited etheric body was begun and has proceeded
ever since. In the etheric body of the human being you have a repetition of the same
process in the triangle of energies created by the relationship between the Monad,
the Soul, and the Personality.
It is well nigh impossible for man to draw or make a picture of the network of
triangles and, at the same time, see them taking the circular form in their totality of
the etheric body of the planetary sphere. The reason is that the whole etheric body is
in constant motion and ceaseless transformation, and the energies of which it is
composed are in a state of constant change and circulation.
It is wise to have in mind that it is the mechanism which changes and that this
transformation of the square into the triangle has no reference whatsoever to the
transmitted energies or to the various centers, except in so far that it becomes far
easier for the energies to flow through the triangular formation of the etheric body
than it is to flow - as is now the case - through or around a square and a network of
squares.
I am quite aware that what I am here communicating may seem to you the veriest
nonsense and there is, of course, no possible way in which I can prove to you the
factual nature of this inter-communicating system or in which you can check and

confirm what I say; but then, my brothers, you have no way as yet of ascertaining
the factual existence of Sanat Kumara and yet from the very night of time His
existence has been proclaimed by the Hierarchy and [165] accepted by millions.
Every human being believes a great deal more than he can prove or the validity of
which he can establish.
The centers are in reality those "crossing points" of energies where the etheric body
possesses seven triangles or transformed points. From the angle of Shamballa the
centers in a human being resemble a triangle with a point at the center.
From the angle of the Hierarchy, conditions are somewhat different. You have the
seven centers portrayed as lotuses, with varying numbers of petals; nevertheless
there is always preserved and recognizably present a triangle, at the very heart of
the lotus; always there is the triangle with its communicating point, and to this we
give the name, the "jewel in the lotus." You have therefore the following symbolic
presentation of the lotus, and you would do well to study it with care.

The personality of the man is conditioned by the circle, which is the emanating
influence of the lotus, and an interplay is thereby set up. The lotus itself is
conditioned by the soul and in its turn conditions the "sphere of influence in the aura
of the lotus" thus reaching into and conditioning the personality life. The triangle is
conditioned by the Spiritual Triad, when the antahkarana is built or in process of
building, and in its turn first of all inspires or fires the soul, and then finally destroys
it. The dot at the center is indicative of monadic life, first of all in its lowest
expression of physical life and vitality, and finally as the "point of sensitivity."
Therefore we have:
1. The Point at the center, indicative of the monadic life. [166]
2. The related energies of the egoic lotus, conditioned by the soul.
3. The sphere of radiation, the emanating influence of the lotus, conditioning the
personality.
4. The triangle of energy, conditioned by the Spiritual Triad.
The foregoing instruction on the etheric body is not long but it contains much that is
relatively new and provides much food for assimilation. [167]

IV. The Centers and the Personality
We will now consider the centers as controlling factors in the life of the personality in
the three worlds, and their relation to each other, always studying the subject from
the angle of their relation to one of the three major planetary centers - Shamballa,
the Hierarchy and Humanity - in connection with:
1. The Point at the Center.
2. Related Energies.
3. Sphere of Radiation.
4. The Triangle of Energy.
The abstruseness of this theme is very great; a basic statement will, however, serve
somewhat to clarify the subject; it is a statement which has seldom found expression
elsewhere. Let me phrase it as simply as possible:
The centers below the diaphragm, i.e., the solar plexus center, the
sacral center and the center at the base of the spine, are controlled by
the four ethers of the planetary physical plane; the centers above the
diaphragm, i.e., the heart center, the throat center, the ajna center
and the head center, are controlled by the four cosmic ethers, to which
we give the names of the energies of the buddhic plane, the energies
of the atmic plane, the energies of the monadic plane and the energies
of the logoic plane.
This statement involves a somewhat new concept; it creates a basic relation, making
possible the fact that "as above so below." Think this out. It has serious implications.
[168]
The centers below the diaphragm are - during the evolutionary process - controlled
by the first, the second and the third ethers, counting from below upward; when
evolution has brought the aspirant to the point of personal integration, then the
energies of the highest, the etheric-atomic plane can and do control. When that
takes place, then the possibility is present of the energies of the cosmic etheric
planes bringing the centers above the diaphragm into full expression. This takes
place upon the Path of Discipleship and the Path of Initiation. This interesting process
of transference of energies is called by several names, such as "radiatory
substitution," "energizing at-one-ment," and "inspirational reflected light of energy."
All these terms are efforts to express in somewhat inadequate words what happens
when the higher energies are substituted for the lower, when the magnetic "pull" of
the spiritual energies draws upward and absorbs the lower energies which are
concerned primarily with the personality life, or when the reflecting light of the
Spiritual Triad and of the Monadic Glory are transferred into the higher energy
centers in the final vehicle used by the developed human being.
Little has as yet been given out anent the relation of the four physical ethers and the
four cosmic ethers; there is nevertheless a direct relation between them, and this
the initiatory process reveals. This also brings about significant changes in the
vehicles of humanity. There is also a direct relation between the four aspects of
karma (the Law of Cause and Effect) and the four physical ethers, as well as the four
cosmic ethers; this relationship will later constitute the basis of a new occult science.
Therefore, there is yet much to be grasped by students concerning energy, its
emanating sources, its mode of transfer or its transitional processes, and its
anchorage within the planetary body, or the physical body of the individual. With
some of these [169] ideas we will now deal, thus laying the foundation for future

investigation, but saying little which will be of immediate use to the individual
student.
It is relatively easy to list the four cosmic ethers and then list the four ethers of the
physical plane as we know them, and then make the statement that the average
person is controlled by the centers below the diaphragm, which are responsive to the
physical plane ethers as they transmit energies from the three worlds of human
evolution, and that the initiate is responsive to the cosmic ethers, as they play
through and awaken the centers above the diaphragm. It must at the same time be
remembered that the seven centers in the etheric vehicle of man are always
composed of the physical ethers, but become - upon the Path of Discipleship - the
vehicles of the cosmic ethers. To retain the picture with clarity, it might be well to
consider very briefly the four aspects of the centers as I have listed them above, or
that totality which they present to the eye of the See-er.
These are:
1. The Point at the Center. This is the "jewel in the lotus," to use the ancient oriental
appellation; it is the point of life by means of which the Monad anchors itself upon
the physical plane, and is the life principle therefore of all the transient vehicles -
developed, undeveloped or developing. This point of life contains within itself all
possibilities, all potentialities, all experiences and all vibratory activities. It embodies
the will-to-be, the quality of magnetic attraction (commonly called love), and the
active intelligence which will bring the livingness and the love into full expression.
The above statement or definition is one of major importance. This point at the
center is in reality, therefore, all that IS and the other three aspects of life - as listed
- are merely indications of its existence. It is that which has capacity to withdraw to
its Source, or to impose upon itself [170] layer upon layer of substance; it is the
cause of the return of the so-called Eternal Pilgrim to the Father's Home after many
aeons of experience, as well as that which produces experiment, leading to eventual
experience and final expression. It is also that which the other three aspects shield,
and which the seven principles (expressing themselves as vehicles) protect. There
are seven of these "points" or "jewels," expressing the sevenfold nature of
consciousness, and as they are brought one by one into living expression, the seven
subrays of the dominating monadic ray are also one by one made manifest, so that
each initiate-disciple is (in due time) a Son of God in full and outer glory.
The time comes when the individual etheric body is submerged or lost to sight in the
light emanating from these seven points and colored by the light of the "jewel in the
lotus" in the head, the thousand petalled lotus. Each center is then related by a line
of living fire and each is then in full divine expression.
Much emphasis has been placed by teachers in the past upon the "killing out" of the
centers below the diaphragm, or upon the transference of the energies of these
centers into their higher correspondences. This I also have pointed out in other
writings and instructions, because it is a definite way in which to convey essential
truth. These methods of expression are, however, only symbolic phrases, and to that
extent are true; nevertheless, at the close of the evolutionary process every single
center in the etheric body is a living, vibrant and beautiful expression of the basic
energy which has ever sought to use it. They are, however, energies which are
dedicated to divine and not to material living, and are clear, pure and radiant; their
central point of light is of such a brilliance that the ordinary eye of man can scarcely
register it. At this point it must be remembered that though there are seven of these
points, one at the center of each lotus, [171] there are only three types of such
"jewels in the lotus" because the Monad expresses only the three major aspects of
divinity, or the three major rays.

2. The Related Energies. This expression has reference to what have been called the
"petals" of the lotus; with these differentiations of the various energies I seek not
here to deal; too much emphasis has ever been laid upon them both by oriental and
occidental writers; there is far too much curiosity about the number of petals in any
particular center, about their arrangement and about their coloring and quality. If
these matters interest you, you can search in the standard books for this
information, remembering as you garner the proffered information that you are not
in a position to prove its accuracy; its usefulness, therefore, to you is highly
problematical. I write this for real students and for those who seek to live the life of
the spirit; the information which theorists seek is amply provided for both by me and
many other exponents of the technicalities of the Ageless Wisdom.
All I would remark is that as the point in the center is the point of life and the
permanent, persistent Eternal ONE, so the related energies or petals are indicative of
the state of consciousness which that Eternal One is able - at any stated point in
time and space - to express. This may be the relatively undeveloped state of
consciousness of the savage, the consciousness of the average man or the highly
developed consciousness of the initiate up to the third degree, or the still more
vibrant awareness of the initiate of still higher grades. It is ever concerned with
CONSCIOUSNESS; only the point at the center is concerned with the first or life
aspect; the petals concern the second or the consciousness aspect, and this must be
most carefully borne in mind. [172]
The state of the consciousness is ever indicated by the size, the color and the activity
of the energies which compose the petals of the lotus; their unfoldment and their
development is conditioned by the governing rays, as well as by the age and the
length of the soul's expression. The extent and the nature of the relative "brightness"
is also conditioned by the point of focus in any particular life, as well as by the trend
of the thinking of the soul which is in incarnation; it must be remembered here that
"energy follows thought." The natural focus or point of polarization is at times most
definitely offset by a man's line of thought (whatever that may currently be) or by
the fact that he is living, consciously or unconsciously, the life of every day. An
instance of this can be found in the fact that a disciple's natural focus might be the
solar plexus center, but because of his fixed and determined thought, the energy
which he wields can be directed to one of the centers above the diaphragm, thus
producing a temporary atrophying of the center below the diaphragm and the
consequent stimulation of that which lies above that dividing line. Thus are the
needed changes made.
When the cycle of evolution is nearing its close and the initiate-disciple has well nigh
run his course, the energies are all fully developed, active and vibrant, and are
therefore consciously used as essential aspects of the initiate's contact mechanism.
This is often forgotten and the emphasis of the student's thinking is laid upon the
centers as expressions of his natural unfoldment, whereas that is of relatively
secondary importance. The centers are, in reality, focal points through which energy
can be distributed, under skilled direction, in order to make a needed impact upon
those centers or individuals which the disciple seeks to aid. These impacts can be
stimulated or vitalized at need, or they can be deliberately [173] destructive, thus
aiding in the liberation from substance or matter of the one to be aided.
It is high time that students paid attention to the service angle of the centers, and to
the focusing and the use of energy in service. It is here that the knowledge of the
number of the petals which form a center is involved, because this knowledge
indicates the number of the energies which are available for service, i.e., two
energies, twelve energies, sixteen energies, and so forth. No attention has hitherto

been paid to this important point, but it embodies the practical use of the new
occultism in the coming New Age. The oriental symbols which are often
superimposed upon the illustrations of the centers should now be discontinued,
because they convey no real use to the occidental mind.
3. The Sphere of Radiation. This obviously concerns the radius of influence or the
outgoing vibratory effect of the centers, as they are gradually and slowly brought
into activity. These centers, or their vibrations, are in reality what creates or
constitutes the so-called aura of the human being, even though that aura is
frequently confused with the health aura. Instead of the word "frequently" I had
almost said "usually," because that would be more definitely correct. It is the etheric
body which indicates and conditions the aura, which is presumed to demonstrate
what the personality is, emotionally and mentally, and (occasionally) what is
indicated of soul control. This is not a false premise, and I would have you register
this fact. It is, however, excessively limited in its import, because the aura is in
reality indicative of the subject's centers. From the study of this aura certain things
can be ascertained:
a. Whether the development is above or below the diaphragm.
b. Whether the centers are undeveloped or developed. [174]
c. Whether the nature of the controlling rays is adequately clear.
d. Whether the point at the center and the petals of the lotus are controlled, or
whether a balance is being achieved.
e. Whether the personality is outgoing, and is therefore in a state of livingness,
or whether a withdrawing is taking place due to introspection and self-
centeredness, or to the slow oncoming of the death process.
f. Whether the personality or the soul is in control, and whether, therefore, a
struggle between the two is going on.
You can see, therefore, how revealing the aura can be to the individual who has the
ability to read it with accuracy, and how thankful you should be that such a capacity
is relatively rare, or is in the possession of an Initiate or of a Master Whose nature is
LOVE.
The "sphere of radiation" is a potent instrument in service, and its extent and purity
of contact should be cultivated by the pledged disciple. There is true occult teaching
in the statement in The New Testament that "the shadow of Peter passing by
healed." His aura was of such a nature that it had a beneficent effect wherever and
whenever it touched or contacted those in his environment. The control of the Christ
over His aura was such that "He knew when virtue had gone out of Him" - He knew,
therefore, that healing energies had poured through one of His centers to a needy
person or group of persons. It is the aura, and its potency of attraction, and its
stability, which also holds a group together, which also keeps an audience listening,
and which makes an individual of importance along some definite [175] line of
approach to his fellowmen. The "sphere of radiation" is easily determined by those
who seek it out and who watch the effect of the radiation upon people in their
community and environment. One highly emotional person, working through an
over-developed and uncontrolled solar plexus center, can wreck a home or an
institution. I give this as an illustration. One radiant, creative life, consciously using
the heart or the throat centers, can carry inspiration to hundreds. These are points
well worth careful consideration. You must, however, bear in mind that these centers
are brought into activity by the cultivation of certain major virtues, and not by
meditation or concentration upon the centers. They are brought automatically into

the needed radiatory condition by right living, high thinking and loving activity.
These virtues may seem to you dull and uninteresting, but they are most potent and
scientifically effective in bringing the centers into the desired radiatory activity. When
the task is done, and when all the centers are living spheres of outgoing, radiatory
activity, they swing into each others' orbit so that the initiate becomes a center of
living light and not a composite of seven radiant centers. Think on this.
4. The Central Triangle of Energies. This central triangle indicates unmistakably the
three rays which condition a man's "periodical vehicles," as H.P.B. expresses it.
These are: the monadic ray, the soul ray and the personality ray. To the watching
and attentive Master it is also apparent which ray is the controlling ray, but this is
not possible to anyone below the grade of Master. Disciples and other onlookers
must form their conclusions from the "nature of the sphere of radiation." An element
of error can creep in at this point, which is not possible to a Master; it must,
however, be remembered that until the sixth Initiation of Decision, "the Monad
guards two secrets, but loses three [176] when it takes control and the soul fades
out." This, I may not further elucidate.
I have here given a somewhat new slant or picture of the centers. It is one of great
value to students could they but realize it, because it is not truly in line with the
information given to them in the occult books. An understanding of what I have said
will lead the earnest student to a more practical application of his attitude to the
centers, and also to a fixed endeavor to make his sphere of radiatory activity more
useful to his fellowmen. The reason for this will be that his attitude will express the
quality of the subjective spirit and not the quality - hitherto rampant - of objective
matter. Forget not that the etheric body is a material and substantial body, and is
therefore an integral part of the physical plane; forget not that it is intended, first of
all, to carry the energies of the emotional and of the mental plane in the unconscious
experimental stage of incarnation; that it is also intended to carry the threefold
energies of the soul in the stage of consciously gaining experience; and that also, as
the antahkarana is built, it is intended to carry the energies of the Monad in the
stage of consciously expressed divinity. See you, therefore, the beauty of the
spiritual process, and the planned aid given to the sons of men at all stages of their
return to the center from whence they came? [177]

V. The Nature of Space
Certain wide generalizations anent the etheric body should be recalled at this point.
The existence of an etheric body in relation to all tangible and exoteric forms is
accepted today by many scientific schools; nevertheless the original teaching has
been amended in order to bring it into line with the usual theories of energy and its
forms of expression. Recognition is given today, by thinkers, to the factual nature of
energy (and I am using that word "factual" most advisedly); energy is now regarded
as all that IS; manifestation is the manifestation of a sea of energies, some of which
are built into forms, others constitute the medium in which those forms live and
move and have their being, and still others are in process of animating both the
forms and their environing substantial media. It must also be remembered that
forms exist within forms; this is the basis of the symbolism which is to be found in
the intricate carved ivory balls of the Chinese craftsmen where ball within ball is to
be discovered, all elaborately carved and all free and yet confined. You - as you sit in
your room - are a form within a form; that room is itself a form within a house, and
that house (another form) is probably one of many similar houses, placed the one on
top of another or else side by side, and together composing a still larger form. Yet all
these diverse forms are composed of tangible substance which - when coordinated
and brought together by some recognized design or idea in the mind of some thinker
- creates a material form. This tangible substance is composed of living energies,
vibrating in relation to each other, yet owning their own quality and their own [178]
qualified life. I dealt with much of this in A Treatise on Cosmic Fire and you would
find it profitable to reread what I there said. I will not repeat it here as I am seeking
a different approach.
It might be profitable to point out that the entire universe is etheric and vital in
nature and of an extension beyond the grasp of the greatest mind of the age,
mounting into more than astronomical figures - if that statement even conveys sense
to your minds. This extent cannot be computed, even in terms of light years; this
cosmic etheric area is the field of untold energies and the basis of all astrological
computations; it is the playground of all historical cycles - cosmic, systemic and
planetary and is related to the constellations, to the worlds of suns, to the most
distant stars and to the numerous recognized universes, as well as to our own solar
system, to the many planets, and to that planet upon which and in which we move
and live and have our being, as well as to the smallest form of life known to science
and perhaps covered by the meaningless term "an atom." All are found existing in
Space - Space is etheric in nature and - so we are told in the occult science - Space
is an Entity. The glory of man lies in the fact that he is aware of space and can
imagine this space as the field of divine living activity, full of active intelligent forms,
each placed in the etheric body of this unknown Entity, each related to each other
through the potency which not only holds them in being but which preserves their
position in relation to each other; yet each of these differentiated forms possesses its
own differentiated life, its own unique quality or integral coloring, and its own
specific and peculiar form of consciousness.
This etheric body - vast and unknown as it is, as to its extent - is nevertheless
limited in nature and static (relatively speaking) in capacity; it preserves a set form,
a form [179] of which we know absolutely nothing, but which is the etheric form of
the Unknown Entity. To this form the esoteric science gives the name of SPACE; it is
the fixed area in which every form, from a universe to an atom, finds its location.
We speak at times of an expanding universe; what we really mean is an expanding
consciousness, for this etheric body of the Entity, Space, is the recipient of many

types of informing and penetrating energies, and it is also the field for the intelligent
activity of the indwelling Lives of the Universe, of the many constellations, of the
distant stars, of our solar system, of the planets within the system, and of all that
constitutes the sumtotal of these separated living forms. The factor which relates
them is consciousness and nothing else, and the field of conscious awareness is
created through the interplay of all living intelligent forms within the area of the
etheric body of that great Life which we call SPACE.
Every form within the etheric body is like a center in a planet or in the human body,
and the resemblance - based upon what I gave you herein in relation to the human
centers - is correct and recognizable.
Each form (because it constitutes an aggregated area of substantial lives or atoms)
is a center within the etheric body of the form of which it is a constituent part. It
has, as the basis of its existence, a living dynamic point which integrates the form
and preserves it in essential being. This form or center - large or small, a man or an
atom of substance - is related to all other forms and expressing energies in the
environing space, and is automatically receptive to some, and repudiates others
through the process of non-recognition; it relays or transmits other energies,
radiating from other forms, and it thus becomes in its turn an impressing agent. You
see, therefore, where differentiated truths approach each other and blend, forcing us
to use the [180] same terminologies in order to express the same factual truths or
ideas.
Again, each point of life within a center has its own sphere of radiation or its own
extending field of influence; this field is necessarily dependent upon the type and the
nature of the indwelling Consciousness. It is this magnetic interplay between the
many vast centers of energy in space which is the basis of all astronomical
relationships - between universes, solar systems and planets. Bear in mind,
however, that it is the CONSCIOUSNESS aspect which renders the form magnetic,
receptive, repudiating and transmitting; this consciousness differs according to the
nature of the entity which informs or works through a center, great or small. Bear in
mind also that the life which pours through all centers and which animates the whole
of space is the life of an Entity; it is, therefore, the same life in all forms, limited in
time and space by the intention, the wish, the form and the quality of the indwelling
consciousness; the types of consciousness are many and diverse, yet life remains
ever the same and indivisible, for it is the ONE LIFE.
The sphere of radiation is conditioned always by the point of evolution of the life
within the form; the correlating, integrating factor, relating center to center, is life
itself; life establishes contact; livingness is the basis of every relation, even if this is
not immediately apparent to you; consciousness qualifies the contact and colors the
radiation. Thus again we are returned to the same fundamental triplicity to which I
gave the names of Life, Quality, Appearance in an earlier book. (A Treatise on the
Seven Rays, Vol I.) A form is therefore a center of life within some aspect of the
etheric body of the Entity, Space, where a living animated existence, such as that of
a planet, is concerned. The same is true also of all lesser forms, such as those found
upon and within a plane. [181]
This center has within it a point of life and is related to all surrounding energies; it
has its own sphere of radiation or of influence which is dependent upon the nature or
strength of its consciousness and upon the dynamic conditioning factor of the
ensouling entity's thought life. These are points worthy of your most careful
consideration. Finally, every center has its central triangle of energies; one of these
energies expresses the ensouling life of the form; another expresses the quality of its
consciousness, whilst the third - the dynamic, integrating life which holds form and

consciousness together in one expressive livingness - conditions the radiation of the
form, its responsiveness or non-responsiveness to the environing energies and the
general nature of the informing life, plus its creative ability.
Much that I have given you here will serve to elucidate that which I have written
upon esoteric astrology; (A Treatise on the Seven Rays, Vol. III; The Destiny of the
Nations.) it will give you the key to that science of relationships which is essentially
the key to astrology and also to the science of Laya Yoga. This latter science has
(fortunately for the Aryan race) fallen into disrepute since later Atlantean days; it
will, however, be restored and used upon a higher turn of the spiral, during the next
five hundred years. When correctly and rightly restored, its emphasis will not be
upon the nature of the center involved, but upon the quality of the consciousness
which distinguishes any particular center and which will then necessarily condition its
sphere of radiation. Under the great Law of Correspondences, all that I have here
given or indicated can be applied by the student to all forms of life: to a universe, to
a solar system, to a planet, to a human being, to any subhuman form and to the
tiniest atom of substance (whatever you may mean by that last term!). [182]

VI. The Planetary Life - A Center in the Solar System
We shall now endeavor to apply whatever knowledge is available to you at this time
in relation to the planetary Life, expressing itself as a center in the solar system. We
shall also study its secondary expression through the medium of three major
centers: Shamballa, the Hierarchy, and Humanity.
The fundamental concept of hylozoism underlies all the esoteric teaching upon the
theme of manifesting life. All forms are composed of many forms, and all forms -
aggregated or single in nature - are the expression of an indwelling or ensouling life.
The fusion of life with living substance produces another aspect of expression: that of
consciousness. This consciousness varies according to the natural receptivity of the
form, according to its point in evolution, and to its position also in the great chain of
Hierarchy.
However, dwarfing every other concept, is the concept of life itself. There is - as far
as we have ever been permitted to know - only one Life, expressing itself as Being,
as responsive consciousness, and as material appearance. That One Life knows itself
(if such a term can be used) as the will-to-be, the will-to-good, and the will-to-know.
It will be obvious to you that these are only terms or methods organized to convey a
better picture than heretofore.
This is also a brief preamble to another statement, which can be worded as follows:
The planetary Logos, the One in Whom we live and move and have our being, is the
informing, ensouling life of this planet, the Earth; it is His life which integrates the
planet as a whole, and His life which pours through all forms - great or small - which,
[183] in their aggregate, constitute the planetary form. Preserve, therefore, in your
conscious imagination and by means of the innate symbol-making faculty which all
men possess, the concept of our planet as a great lotus composed of many
interweaving energies, located within the greater form of the solar system which is,
as we know, esoterically portrayed as a twelve-petalled lotus. This lotus, the Earth,
is responsive to the many entering energies with which I dealt at some length in my
book upon Esoteric Astrology. (A Treatise on the Seven Rays, Vol. III.)
At the heart of this vast sea of energies is to be found that cosmic Consciousness to
Whom we give the name of Sanat Kumara, the Lord of the World, the Ancient of
Days. It is His Will-to-Be which brought His manifested form into the tangible arena
of life; it is His Will-to-Good which activates the Law of Evolution and carries His
Form, with the myriad lesser forms of which it is composed, on to the ultimate glory
which He alone visions and knows. It is His consciousness and His sensitive response
to all forms and to all states of being and to all possible impacts and contacts which
guarantees the developing consciousness of all the many lives within or upon this
Earth of ours.
This great Center of Existence works through a triangle of energies or through lesser
centers, each of which is brought into active expression by one of the three major
Rays or Energies. The Center which is created by the Ray of Will or Power is called
Shamballa and its major activity is bequeathing, distributing and circulating the basic
principle of life itself to every form which is held within the planetary ring-pass-not of
the planetary Life or Logos. This energy is the dynamic incentive at the heart of
every form and the sustained expression of the intention of Sanat Kumara - an
intention working out as the planetary Purpose which is known only to Him. [184]
The second Center is created by the Ray of Love-Wisdom; this is the basic energy
which brought into being the entire manifested universe, for it is the energy of the
Builder Aspect. To it we give - as far as humanity is concerned - the name of
Hierarchy, for it is the controlling factor of the great chain of Hierarchy. The prime

activity of this Center is related to the unfolding consciousness of the planet, and
therefore of all forms of life within or upon the planet; it is not related to the life
aspect in any sense.
The task of the "units of Energy" who constitute the personnel of this Center is to
awaken and arouse the sense of awareness and of consciousness which is sensitive
in its response to the life within all forms. Just as the basic mode of activity in and
through Shamballa could be called the Science of Life or of dynamic livingness, so
the basic science by means of which the Hierarchy works could be called the Science
of Relationships. Consciousness is not only the sense of identity or of self-awareness,
but it concerns also the sense of relation of that recognized self or the "I" to all other
selves. This consciousness is progressively developed, and the Members of this
second Center, the Hierarchy, have the major and important task, in this particular
solar systemic cycle, of bringing all the units in each kingdom of nature to an
understanding of place, position, responsibility and relationships. This probably
sounds entirely meaningless in relation to those conditions where the units of life
are, for instance, in the vegetable or the animal kingdom, but a glimmering of
understanding may come when you remember that the seed or germ of all states of
consciousness is latent in every form, and of this the instinct to perpetuate and the
instinct to mate are the major incubating areas.
The third Center is that of the Human Kingdom, which is brought into being by
means of the energy of the third [185] Ray of Active Intelligence. Its major function
is intelligent creation; but it has nevertheless a secondary activity which is to relate
the second and the third Centers to each other and to assume progressive control of
the subhuman kingdoms and relate them to each other. This secondary function is
only now assuming proportions which can be recognized and noted.
Each of these three Centers has a governing and controlling Triangle or central
Triangle of Energies. In relation to Shamballa, this Triangle is composed of the three
Buddhas of Activity Who represent conscious intelligent life, conscious, intelligent
and active wisdom, and conscious, intelligent and active creation.
In connection with the Hierarchy, the central Triangle is composed of the Manu,
representing loving intelligent life, the Christ, representing loving intelligent
consciousness, and the Mahachohan, representing loving intelligent activity, and
therefore between Them representing every phase of group livingness, group
expression and group action; these qualities focus through the Mahachohan,
primarily because He is the Lord of Civilization and the civilizations of humanity
represent progressive growth and unfoldment.
Only in the final root-race of men upon our planet will the essential central Triangle
make its appearance and function openly in the third planetary Center, that of
Humanity. Men are not yet ready for this, but the areas of conscious creative
activity, out of which this triangle of functioning embodied energies will emerge, is
already in preparation. One point of this future triangle will emerge out of the field of
world governments, of politics and of statesmanship; another will appear out of the
world religions, and a third out of the general field of world economics and finance.
Today no such men of spiritual will, of spiritual love and of [186] spiritual intelligence
are to be found upon Earth; even if they did emerge in these three fields of
expression they could do little good, for the sense of recognition and of responsibility
is as yet inadequately developed; later, they will appear and will then openly relate
the department of the Manu to that of world government, the department of the
Christ to that of the world religions, and the department of the Lord of Civilization to
that of the social and financial order. That time will surely come, but it will come only
after the externalization of the Hierarchy and its open functioning upon the physical

plane. Then, some senior disciples from each of the three hierarchical departments
will appear and will attempt the experiment of this centralizing and embodiment of
the three qualities of the central Triangle. They will then discover, by direct action,
when and if mankind is ready for such an experiment of direct control and if it has
developed the needed sense of responsibility - a responsibility which will produce
cooperation.

All these three Centers can therefore be depicted in the following manner: with the
completed circle of the entire energy form, with the central triangle of energies
carrying the qualities of the three major rays, and then the point at the center which
stands for the dynamic embodied Life. In connection with Shamballa, that point is
Sanat Kumara Himself; when the right time comes (though the hour is not yet) He
will place His Representatives as the central points in both the Hierarchy and in
Humanity. For this relatively distant event the doctrine or the theory of Avatars, of
Mediators or of Intermediaries is preparing the way, thus enabling men to think in
these representative and inclusive terms. Not even in the Hierarchy is the time yet
[187] ripe for the "residence in state of the divine Representative." Each year, the
Buddha comes and carries the force of Sanat Kumara to the Hierarchy, but - He
cannot stay. The "units of energy," the Members of the Hierarchy, cannot bear for
long the strong quality of the incoming vibration, except after due preparation and in
group form, and then only for a few scant minutes; nevertheless the "period of
dynamic potency" is being prolonged during this century from one day to five; the
next century may see an even longer period of registration instituted.
At the close of the age, the three major Centers will be in complete, unified and
synchronized activity, with Sanat Kumara in Shamballa over-shadowing and
informing His Representatives in the hierarchical and human Centers; then the
central Triangle in each Center will not be only actively functioning, but they will be
working together in the closest rapport, thus forming symbolically a "Star with nine
points, ever revolving"; then the massed energies of the three major Centers will
dominate the other four centers, controlling the manifestation of the Life Expression
in all the kingdoms of nature.
When one comes to the consideration of the sphere of radiation of these three major
Centers, it is interesting to note that, at this time and in this present world cycle, the
most potent radiation and the widest range of influence is that of the Hierarchy.
Apart from "giving life" to all forms upon and within the planet, the influence or
radiation of Shamballa is definitely and consciously restricted, until such time as the
Hierarchy and Humanity can respond constructively. It is present, needless to say,

and evokes response from those able to swing within its sphere of radiation; but it is
felt that as yet there are too many forms of expression which could not react
correctly to the work of the "Destroyer of forms," which is the most potent [188]
aspect of this first ray center and the one which manifests first, because its work
must be accomplished before the two other aspects of its potency can function
rightly. The center called humanity has as yet an inadequate radiation because of its
- at present - inadequate development; its sphere of influence is relatively limited,
though men are beginning to work outward in the direction of the subhuman
kingdoms and to attract more forcefully the kingdom of souls than heretofore. The
Hierarchy has, however, no interior restrictions such as are consciously and
deliberately imposed upon itself by Shamballa or which are unconsciously imposed
by humanity; any blocking of the hierarchical radiation (if I may use such a term)
will come from the forms on which the impact of its radiation is sought, but the
outgoing influence of the central Triangle of the Hierarchy is unique and far-reaching.
All that we have here been considering takes place within the etheric body of the
planet, for all these centers exist etherically, and only etherically, and are not
affected by the fact that the "units of energy" in Shamballa or in the Hierarchy may
be functioning in physical vehicles. Some are and some are not. The conditioning
Lives in both these Centers work entirely through etheric means, wielding and
controlling energies; the Human Center, with its "units of energy," works largely at
present upon purely physical levels or in the medium of that type of substance which
we call "material"; men work with outer forms, with the tangible elements and with
material factors. The "units" in the other Centers work with substance and not with
matter. This is an interesting and vital distinction. The Hierarchy is existent upon the
buddhic plane, which is the first of the cosmic ethers, and it works from there,
impressing mental matter. Shamballa works on the levels of the three highest ethers
whilst Humanity works primarily in the three worlds [189] of the dense cosmic
physical plane. The New Group of World Servers has in it "units of energy" who can
work both with matter and with substance.
There is here a most interesting distinction and one that is seldom grasped.
Esoterically speaking, the word "matter" or material is given to all forms in the three
worlds; and though the average human being finds it difficult to understand that the
medium in which the mental processes take place and that of which all thought-
forms are made is matter from the spiritual angle, yet so it is; substance -
technically speaking and esoterically understood - is in reality cosmic etheric matter,
or that of which the four higher planes of our seven planes are composed. From the
human angle, ability to work with and in the cosmic etheric substance demonstrates
first of all when the abstract mind awakens and begins to impress the concrete mind;
an intuition is an idea clothed in etheric substance, and the moment a man becomes
responsive to those ideas, he can begin to master the techniques of etheric control.
All this is, in reality, an aspect of the great creative process: ideas, emanating from
the buddhic levels of being (the first or lowest cosmic ether) must be clothed in
matter of the abstract levels of the mental plane; then they must be clothed in
matter of the concrete mental plane; later, with desire matter, and finally (if they
live so long) they assume physical form. An idea which comes from the intuitive
levels of the divine consciousness is a true idea. It is noted or apprehended by the
man who has, within his equipment, substance of the same quality - for it is the
magnetic relation between the man and the idea which has made its apprehension
possible. In the great creative process he must give form to the idea, if he possibly
can, and thus the creative artist or the creative humanitarian comes into being and
the divine creative intention is thereby aided. [190]

Ideas can, however, be stillborn and abortive, and thus fail to arrive at
manifestation.
The student is well aware that the three major Centers have their correspondences
in the human etheric body and that each of them is related to its higher
correspondence and can thus be "impressed" or affected and awakened by the
corresponding higher agent. It might be stated that:
1. Energy from the planetary center, Shamballa, utilizes the head center, the
thousand petalled lotus, when the man is adequately developed. This center
is the agent of the divine will within the life of the spiritual man, working
through the Spiritual Triad. It is only actively useful when the antahkarana is
constructed or in process of construction.
2. Energy from the planetary center, the Hierarchy, utilizes the heart center.
This center is the agent of divine love (expressing basically the will-to-good)
working through the soul of the individual aspirant or disciple; this becomes
possible when contact with the soul has been attained in some measure and
the aspirant is on the way to become a soul-infused personality.
3. Energy from the third planetary center, Humanity, utilizes the throat center,
working through the integrated personality, and therefore only when a
relatively high degree of evolutionary unfoldment has been attained. The
throat center only becomes creatively and spiritually active when the lower
nature has been to some degree subordinated to idealistic aspiration; this
aspiration need not be one that is usually regarded as spiritual and religious
by the orthodox and therefore imprisoned thinker. It must, however, be one
of which the whole integrated man [191] is the instrument and which will be
of such a large nature that it will call all his creative faculty into expression.
In this solar system, the heart center is the first usually to be awakened and active;
as soon as there is life in that center and a measure of activity, the other two major
centers can begin to awaken. The correspondence to this can be seen in the fact that
the Hierarchy is the mediating or middle factor between the planetary head and
throat centers, between Shamballa and Humanity. That is why the emphasis is laid
upon the heart aspect in all the teachings.
There are two centers which are regarded as "receptive and distributing agents" in
an unique manner:
1. The Ajna Center (the center between the eyebrows) works in connection with
the three major centers but mainly, at this stage of human development, as
the distributor of soul force and of spiritual energy as received from the heart
and throat centers.
2. The Solar Plexus Center works in connection with the sacral center and with
the center at the base of the spine, the center of life; it works also with all
subsidiary centers below the diaphragm, gathering and transmuting their
energies and transmitting "that which has been purified" into the higher
major center.
3. It might here be added that the will-to-be is, from one angle, the energy of
immortality; it is the energy which pours into and works through the head
center, whilst the will-to-live demonstrates as the fundamental instinct of
self-preservation and is to be found positively focused in the center at the
base of the spine. The latter is related to the personality [192] and is closely
allied to desire, and therefore to the solar plexus center; there is a direct line
of hitherto unrecognized energy between the lowest center in the spine and

the solar plexus; the other is related to the divine-spiritual man and is closely
allied to the soul, and therefore to the heart center.
The intricacy of all these relationships is most difficult for the neophyte to grasp, and
this difficulty is further increased by the many and varying stages of development, of
ray distinctions, and also by the numerous emphases or principles which are laid
upon vehicles, upon differing planes and planetary levels of consciousness and of
existence. With all this the student is not asked to deal. The factors of importance
which he should attempt to realize and upon which he can construct the temple of
his life and his current mode of living are simply the following - and they are the
same for each and all, no matter what his ray or his point in evolution may be:
1. Man's etheric body is an integral part of the planetary etheric body and is
responsive to the free distribution of the many circulating energies.
2. The three periodical vehicles which compose the expression of the human
being and which make him what he is (the Monad, the Soul, and the
Personality) are each related to the three planetary centers: Shamballa, the
Hierarchy, and Humanity, and therefore to each of man's individual three
major centers.
3. The three centers in the human being which are to be found above the
diaphragm (the head, the heart and the throat centers) are the organs of
reception for energies coming from the three planetary centers. [193]
4. The agent for the distribution of the energies received via the head, the heart
and the throat centers is the ajna center between the eyebrows.
5. The agent for the purification, transmutation and transmission of the energies
of all centers below the diaphragm is the solar plexus center. It is this center
through which the majority of human beings are at this time working. It is the
major controlling center, both for the reception and the distribution of
energies, until such time as the heart center is awakening and beginning to
control the personality.
There is necessarily much more to be said anent this subject of the major planetary
and human centers, but I have here given the student enough upon which to ponder
(I had almost said upon which to puzzle). The one important thing to be borne in
mind is the relationship between the centers, i.e.:
1. Between the centers below the diaphragm and those above it.
2. Between the three major centers with each other.
3. Between the three major centers and the three planetary centers.
All of this must be thought of in terms of circulating and freely moving energies,
distributing themselves throughout the etheric body of the planet (and therefore
through the human etheric body) under the essential purpose of Shamballa and
under the direction of the Hierarchy.
It is the theme of relationship, therefore, which is the basic pattern in the
evolutionary process of unfoldment in this, the second solar system (of three
systems) which is [194] that of the Son, wherein the quality of the second divine
aspect, Love, is being perfected. In this perfecting process man participates
unconsciously at first, during the long cycle of evolutionary unfoldment under the
Law of Necessity; but when he becomes the aspirant and takes the first steps upon
the path towards spiritual maturity, he begins to play a crucial role which he
maintains until he attains spiritual liberation and himself becomes a member of the

Hierarchy, of the fifth or spiritual kingdom, through perfected service in the fourth or
the human kingdom.
The relationship between the fourth and the fifth kingdoms is being continually
increased, bringing new powers and more vital livingness into the human family
which is registered by its most advanced members consciously. The distribution of
energies from the Hierarchy constitutes a very interesting sequence, some of which
can be indicated briefly. As we know, the Hierarchy is the Ashram of the Lord of
Love, the Christ; we also know that this greater Ashram is constituted of the seven
Ray Ashrams, each having at its center a Chohan or a Master of the Wisdom; each of
the seven Ashrams has connected with it one or more subsidiary Ashrams.
An Ashram is an emanating source of hierarchical impression upon the world. Its
"impulsive energies" and its inciting forces are directed toward the expansion of the
human consciousness, through the magnetic lives of the group members as they
carry on their duties, obligations and responsibilities in the outer world; it is aided
also by the steady vibratory activity of the members of the Ashram who are not in
physical incarnation and by the united clear thinking and convinced awareness of the
entire Ashram. Beginners, such as are most aspirants (though not all), are usually
engrossed with the fact of the Ashram. Trained disciples are engrossed with the work
to be done, and the [195] Ashram - as an Ashram - plays little part in their thinking;
they are so preoccupied with the task ahead and with the need of humanity and of
those to be served that they seldom think of the Ashram or of the Master at its
center. They are an integral part of the ashramic consciousness and their conscious
occupation is called, in the ancient writings, "the emanating of that which flows
through them, the teaching of the doctrine of the heart which is the force of truth
itself, the radiating of the light of life, borne upon the stream to which the non-
initiate gives the name, 'the light of love'."
The members of the Ashram constitute a united channel for the new energies which
are, at this time, entering the world; these energies pour dynamically through the
Ashram out into the world of men; they stream with potency through the Master at
the heart of the Ashram; they move with "luminous speed" throughout the inner
circle; they are stepped down by those who constitute the outer circle, and this is
right and good; they are delayed by the beginner and the new disciple from breaking
forth into the world of men, and this is not so good. They are delayed because the
new disciple has turned his back upon the world of men and his eyes are fastened
upon the inner goal and not upon the outer service; they remain fixed upon the
Master and His senior disciples and workers, and not upon the mass of human need.

It is essential that servers everywhere - the intelligent men and women of good will -
get a grasp, fresh and clear, of the work to be done and that they become "relaying
channels and not delaying points of selfish interest" in the divine flow. This takes
vision and courage. It takes courage to adjust their lives - daily and in all relations -
to the need of the hour and to the service of mankind; it takes courage to attack life
problems on behalf of others and [196] to obliterate one's own personal wishes in
the emergency and need, and to do so consistently and persistently. However, there
is much to encourage the server. Humanity has now reached a point in development
where there is a definite grasp of the Plan of the Hierarchy - call it brotherhood,
sharing, internationalism, unity or what you will. This is a growing and factual
apprehension and is a general recognition by the thinkers and esotericists of the
world, by the religious people of enlightenment, by broad minded statesmen, by
industrialists and business men of inclusive vision and humanitarian insight, and
even today by the man in the street. There is also a more definite recognition of
emerging spiritual values and a greater readiness to relinquish hindrances to service.

The plans of the Christ for humanity's release are more matured, for they had to wait
until such time that the trend of human aspiration became more clearly emphatic;
and the new era, with its latent possibilities can now be seen upon the horizon,
stripped of the veils of glamor and wishful thinking which obscured it ten years ago.
All of this is a challenge to the disciple. What is it that he must do?
The disciple has to take himself as he is, at any time, with any given equipment, and
under any given circumstances; he then proceeds to subordinate himself, his affairs
and his time to the need of the hour - particularly during the phase of group,
national or world crisis. When he does this within his own consciousness and is,
therefore, thinking along lines of the true values, he will discover that his own
private affairs are taken care of, his capacities are increased and his limitations are
forgotten. He takes his place with those who perceive the needs of the coming cycle
- a cycle wherein the new ideas and ideals must be stressed and for which a fight
must be made, wherein the wider plans for the good of the whole must be
understood, [197] endorsed and preached, the new and clearer vision for human
living must be grasped and finally brought into being, and a cycle wherein the effort
of all members of the new Group of World Servers must be given to the lifting of
humanity's load.
There is a certain esoteric Mantram which embodies this attitude - the attitude of the
disciple who is striving, in cooperative endeavor with others, to link hierarchical
intent with human aspiration and thus bring humanity nearer to its goal. The intent
of the Hierarchy is to increase men's capacity for freedom in order to function
effectively with that "life more abundantly" which the Christ will bring and which
demands that the spirit of man be free - free to approach divinity and free also to
choose the Way of that approach. The Mantram bears the name, "The Affirmation of
the Disciple." It involves certain inner recognitions and acceptances which are readily
perceived by those whose intuition is sufficiently awake; but its meaning should not
be beyond the ability of any sincere student and thinker to penetrate if it appeals to
them as significant and warranting their effort.
I am a point of light within a greater Light.
I am a strand of loving energy within the stream of Love divine.
I am a point of sacrificial Fire, focused within the fiery Will of God.
And thus I stand.
I am a way by which men may achieve.
I am a source of strength, enabling them to stand.
I am a beam of light, shining upon their way.
And thus I stand.
And standing thus, revolve
And tread this way the ways of men,
And know the ways of God.
And thus I stand.


